What are Vibrio?
Vibrio are bacteria that naturally live in certain coastal waters. They are found in higher numbers in May through October, when water temperatures are warmer.

Coastal waters include salt water and brackish water. Brackish water is a mixture of salt water and fresh water. It is often found where rivers meet the ocean.

What is vibriosis?
About a dozen species (kinds) of Vibrio can cause a human illness called vibriosis. The most common species causing human illness in the United States are

Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Vibrio vulnificus
Vibrio alginolyticus
Keep in mind
This site focuses on vibriosis. Other strains of Vibrio can cause a human illness called cholera.
How do people get vibriosis?
Most people get vibriosis by eating raw or undercooked shellfish, particularly oysters.

Some people get vibriosis after an open wound comes in contact with coastal waters.

How common is vibriosis?
CDC estimates that:

80,000 cases of vibriosis happen each year in the United States.
52,000 cases of vibriosis are the result of eating contaminated food.
Keep Reading
Preventing Vibrio Infection
Symptoms
Common signs and symptoms of Vibrio infection
Watery diarrhea
Stomach cramps
Nausea
Vomiting
Fever
Chills
Signs and symptoms of Vibrio bloodstream infection
Fever
Chills
Dangerously low blood pressure
Blistering skin lesions
Signs and symptoms of Vibrio wound infection
Fever
Redness
Pain
Swelling
Warmth
Discoloration (turning a color other than normal)
Discharge (leaking fluids)
Complications
Some Vibrio species, such as Vibrio vulnificus, can cause severe and life-threatening infections.

Some Vibrio infections lead to necrotizing fasciitis, a severe infection in which the flesh around an open wound dies. Some media reports call Vibrio vulnificus "flesh-eating bacteria." However, public health experts believe group A Streptococcus are the most common cause of necrotizing fasciitis in the United States.

Many people with Vibrio vulnificus infection can get seriously ill and need intensive care or limb amputation. About 1 in 5 people with this infection die, sometimes within a day or two of becoming ill.

When to seek emergency care
Immediately see your doctor or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms of a Vibrio bloodstream or wound infection. Do not wait.
People at risk
Anyone can get a Vibrio infection.

Some medical conditions and treatments can increase your risk for infection and severe complications. They include:

Having liver disease, cancer, diabetes, HIV, or thalassemia
Receiving immune-suppressing therapy for the treatment of disease
Taking medicine to decrease stomach acid levels
Having had recent stomach surgery
Some behaviors also can increase your risk of infection. These include:

Eating raw seafood, particularly oysters
Exposing an open wound to coastal waters
Exposing an open wound to raw seafood or its drippings
Diagnosis and testing
Infection is diagnosed when Vibrio are found in the wound, blood, or stool (poop) of an ill person.

If you have signs and symptoms of infection, be sure to tell your healthcare provider if

You recently ate raw or undercooked seafood, especially oysters
You have an open wound that might have come in contact with
Coastal water, including salt water or brackish water
Raw or undercooked seafood or its drippings
Treatment
Antibiotics are not recommended to treat mild Vibrio infections. People with diarrhea or vomiting should drink plenty of liquids to prevent dehydration. Dehydration is not having enough fluids in the body.

Antibiotics can be used to treat severe or prolonged Vibrio infections.

Vibrio wound infection is treated with antibiotics and surgery to remove dead or infected tissue. Surgery might include amputation.