E. coli
What you can do to reduce the risk of becoming ill due to E. coli
What is E. coli
Escherichia coli (known as E. coli) is a type of bacteria that can be found in the intestines of
animals and humans. Many types (strains) of E. coli?are harmless to humans, but some can
cause serious illness. These strains produce toxins called ‘Shiga toxins’.  
There are different types of Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC) that can cause illness, such as
STEC O157. This strain is responsible for most cases in the UK but other strains, which are
referred to as non-O157 STECs are also capable of causing severe disease.? 
People who are most likely to suffer severe symptoms are young children, pregnant women,
people with an underlying health condition (e.g. cancer, diabetes, liver and kidney disease) and
older people.  
You can find information on the symptoms of E. coli and how it makes you ill on the following
sites:
NHS - Food poisoning
NIDirect - Food poisoning
NHS 111 Wales - Food poisoning
UKHSA - Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli: guidance, data and analysis
Video: FSA explains E. coli
How E. coli is spread
E. coli can be found in foods such as raw and undercooked meats (for example minced meat),
raw milk, dairy products made from raw milk (unpasteurised milk) or contaminated fresh produce
such as fruits and leafy green vegetables.  
There is a risk of spreading the bacteria through cross-contamination in, for example by contact
between raw and cooked foods and contaminated equipment and utensils or by poor food
hygiene (e.g. not washing hands before preparing food)  
It can also be spread through contact with people who have the illness, and through pets and
their faeces. 
How you can reduce the risk of E.coli?at home
To reduce the risk of E. coli, it’s important to:?  
cook food correctly by following the guidance on time and temperature – this will kill?E. coli,
including STEC 
wash fruit and vegetables, including salad leaves, that will be eaten raw or before cooking? 
wash your hands regularly with soap and water before, during and after meal preparation??
avoid cross-contamination??which might lead to bacteria passing from raw foods to fresh,
cooked or foods that are ready to eat via things like reusable shopping bags, knives, dirty
surfaces and chopping boards.
chill your food??below 5°C - this will stop or significantly slow the growth of bacteria
including E. coli
use food and drink by the use-by?date?on the label, even if it looks and smells fine - eating
food after this date could put your health at risk as you can’t see, smell or taste bacteria
which make you ill
FSA Explains
How E. coli O157 makes people ill
Although many forms of E. coli are harmless and can help the breakdown of food, some can
cause serious food poisoning such as E. coli O157.
Vero cytotoxin E. coli (VTEC) O157 produces a toxin which is able to rupture and destroy red
blood cells. The destruction of the cells can lead to a serious condition called hemolytic-uremic
syndrome (HUS) and kidney failure