Overview
Practice Essentials
Enterobacter infections can include bacteremia, lower respiratory tract infections, skin and soft tissue infections, urinary
tract infections (UTIs), endocarditis, intra-abdominal infections, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, CNS infections, and
ophthalmic infections.[1]Enterobacter infections can necessitate prolonged hospitalization, multiple and varied imaging
studies and laboratory tests, various surgical and nonsurgical procedures, and powerful and expensive antimicrobial
agents.[2]
Signs and symptoms
Enterobacter infections do not have a clinical presentation that is specific enough to differentiate them from other acute
bacterial infections.
Bacteremia
Signs of Enterobacter bacteremia include the following:
Physical examination and laboratory findings consistent with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS):
Including heart rate that exceeds 90 bpm, a respiratory rate greater than 20, a temperature above 38°C or below
36°C, and a WBC of over 12,000 or under 4000/microliter
Fever: Occurring in more than 80% of children and adults with Enterobacter bacteremia
Hypotension and shock: Occurs in as many as one third of cases
Septic shock: Manifested as disseminated intravascular coagulation, jaundice, acute respiratory distress
syndrome, and other complications of organ failure
Purpura fulminans and hemorrhagic bullae
Ecthyma gangrenosum
Cyanosis and mottling: Frequently reported in children with Enterobacter bacteremia[2]
Lower respiratory tract infections
Enterobacter lower respiratory tract infections can manifest identically to those caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae or
other organisms. The physical examination findings may include the following:
Apprehension
High fever or hypothermia
Tachycardia
Hypoxemia
Tachypnea
Cyanosis[2]
Patients with pulmonary consolidation may present with crackling sounds, dullness to percussion, tubular breath sounds,
and egophony. Pleural effusion may manifest as dullness to percussion and decreased breath sounds.
See Clinical Presentation for more detail.
Diagnosis
Laboratory studies
Studies for the evaluation of Enterobacter infections include the following:
Complete blood count
Creatinine level
Electrolyte evaluation
Fluid analysis, recommendeded for pleural, articular, pericardial, peritoneal, and cerebrospinal fluids; studies may
include cell count and differential, protein, glucose, and, in some cases, pH, lactate dehydrogenase, and amylase 
Urine analysis: Always indicated for urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Factors in the microbiologic diagnosis and assessment of Enterobacter infection include the following:
The most important test to document Enterobacter infections is culture; when the patient presents with signs of
systemic inflammation (eg, fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, elevated or depressed WBC) with or without shock (eg,
hypotension, decreased urinary output), blood cultures are mandatory
Direct Gram staining of the specimen is also useful, because it allows rapid diagnosis of an infection caused by
gram-negative bacilli and helps in the selection of antibiotics with known activity against most of these bacteria
In the laboratory, growth of Enterobacter isolates is expected to be detectable in 24 hours or less; Enterobacter
species grow rapidly on selective (ie, MacConkey) and nonselective (ie, sheep blood and chocolate) agars
Imaging studies
Studies used in the investigation and management of Enterobacter infections include the following:
Chest infections: Serial chest radiography, chest ultrasonography, and computed tomography (CT) scanning
Intra-abdominal infections: CT scanning and ultrasonography
Endocarditis and intravascular infections: Echocardiography (preferably transesophageal) and nuclear indium
scanning
UTIs: Renal ultrasonography; occasionally, CT scanning and pyelography
Central nervous system (CNS) and ophthalmic infections: CT scanning and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Bone and joint infections: Plain radiography, CT scanning and/or MRI studies, nuclear medicine studies
New technologies such as positron emission tomography (PET) scanning may be indicated in very selective cases,
particularly for differentiation of neoplasia and infection.
See Workup for more detail.
Management
Antimicrobial therapy is indicated in virtually all Enterobacter infections. With few exceptions, the major classes of
antibiotics used to manage infections with these bacteria include the following:
Beta-lactams: Carbapenems are the most reliable beta-lactam drugs for the treatment of severe Enterobacter
infections; fourth-generation cephalosporins are a distant second choice
Aminoglycosides: Aminoglycoside resistance is relatively common and varies widely among centers; concerns
about potential toxicities and penetration into some body tissues limit their use
Fluoroquinolones: Resistance to fluoroquinolones is increasing and may be very high in some parts of the world
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ): Resistance to TMP-SMZ is more common
See Treatment and Medication for more detail.
Background
Enterobacter species, particularly those in the Enterobacter cloacae complex are important nosocomial pathogens
responsible for various infections, including bacteremia, lower respiratory tract infections, skin and soft tissue infections,
urinary tract infections (UTIs), endocarditis, intra-abdominal infections, septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, CNS, and
ophthalmic infections.[3]Enterobacter species can also cause various community-acquired infections, including UTIs, skin
and soft tissue infections, and wound infections, among others. They are one of the ESKAPE pathogens: a group
comprised of Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacter spp.) that are capable of 'escaping' the biocidal action of antibiotics and that
cause most of the hospital-associated infections in the United States.[4,5]
The genetic variation (heterogenicity) and biochemical diversity among E cloacae has led to use of the
terminology Enterobacter cloacae complex (ECC).[2,3] Of note, the species formerly known as Enterobacter
aerogenes was reassigned to the genus Klebsiella (now known as Klebsiella aerogenes) in 2017[6] although this
reassignment still is debated. Much of the literature regarding Enterobacter species prior to this date includes data
attributable to K aerogenes. Nevertheless, conclusions regarding E cloacae complex and other individual species (eg, E
cloacae, Enterobacter hormaechei, etc) that may cause human infections remain valid. 
Risk factors for nosocomial Enterobacter infections include hospitalization of greater than 2 weeks, invasive procedures in
the past 72 hours, treatment with antibiotics in the past 30 days, and the presence of a central venous catheter.[7]
Specific risk factors for infection with nosocomial multidrug-resistant strains of Enterobacter species include the recent
use of broad-spectrum cephalosporins or aminoglycosides and ICU care.[8]
These "ICU bugs" cause significant morbidity and mortality, and infection management is complicated by resistance to
multiple antibiotics. Multi-drug resistant Enterobacter cloacae complex, especially those resistant to carbapenems, have
emerged as a global diversifying threat.[9,3]Enterobacter species possess inducible beta-lactamases, which are
undetectable in vitro but are responsible for resistance during treatment. Physicians treating patients with Enterobacter
infections are advised to avoid certain antibiotics, particularly third-generation cephalosporins, because resistant mutants
can quickly appear. [10]The crucial first step is appropriate identification of the bacteria. Antibiograms must be interpreted
with respect to the different resistance mechanisms and their respective frequency, as is reported for Enterobacter
species, even if routine in vitro antibiotic susceptibility testing has not identified resistance.[11,12]
Pathophysiology
Enterobacter species rarely cause disease in healthy individuals. This opportunistic pathogen, similar to other members of
the Enterobacteriaceae family (in the order Enterobacterales), possesses an endotoxin known to play a major role in the
pathophysiology of sepsis and its complications.
Although community-acquired Enterobacter infections occasionally are reported, nosocomial Enterobacter infections are,
by far, most common. Patients most susceptible to Enterobacter infections are those who stay in the hospital, especially
the ICU, for prolonged periods.[7] Other major risk factors for Enterobacter infection include prior use of antimicrobial
agents, concomitant malignancy (especially hemopoietic and solid-organ malignancies), hepatobiliary disease, ulcers of
the upper gastrointestinal tract, use of foreign devices such as intravenous catheters, and serious underlying conditions
such as burns, mechanical ventilation, and immunosuppression.
The source of infection may be endogenous (via the patient's gastrointestinal tract, colonization of the skin, or urinary
tract) or exogenous, resulting from the ubiquitous nature of Enterobacter species. Multiple reports have incriminated the
hands of health care personnel, endoscopes, blood products, devices for monitoring intra-arterial pressure, and
stethoscopes as sources of infection. Outbreaks have been traced to various common sources: total parenteral nutrition
solutions, isotonic saline solutions, albumin, digital thermometers, and dialysis equipment.[13]
Enterobacter species contain a subpopulation of organisms that produce a beta-lactamase at low-levels. Once exposed to
broad-spectrum cephalosporins, the subpopulation of beta-lactamase–producing organisms predominate. Thus, an
Enterobacter infection that appears sensitive to cephalosporins at diagnosis may quickly develop into a resistant infection
during therapy. Carbapenems and cefepime have a more stable beta-lactam ring against the lactamase produced by
resistant strains of Enterobacter.
Epidemiology
Frequency
United States
National surveillance programs continually demonstrate that Enterobacter species remain a significant source of morbidity
and mortality in hospitalized patients.
In the Surveillance and Control of Pathogens of Epidemiological Importance [SCOPE] project, 24,179 nosocomial
bloodstream infections from 1995-2002 were analyzed. Enterobacter species were the second-most-common gram
negative organism behind Pseudomonas aeruginosa; however, both bacteria were reported to each represent 4.7% of
bloodstream infections in ICU settings. Enterobacter species represent 3.1% of bloodstream infections in non-ICU wards.
Of nearly 75,000 gram-negative organisms collected from ICU patients in the United States between 1993 and 2004,
Enterobacter species comprised 13.5% of the isolates. Multidrug resistance increased over time, especially in infections
caused by E cloacae.[8,14]
The National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) reported on healthcare-associated infections (HAI) between 2006 and
2007. They found Enterobacter species to be the eighth most common cause of HAI (5% of all infections) and the fourth
most common gram-negative cause of HAIs.[15]
Previous reports from the National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System (NNIS) demonstrated that Enterobacter
species caused 11.2% of pneumonia cases in all types of ICUs, ranking third after Staphylococcus aureus (18.1%) and P
aeruginosa (17%).[7] The corresponding rates among patients in pediatric ICUs were 9.8% for pneumonia, 6.8% for
bloodstream infections, and 9.5% for UTIs.[16,17,18]
Enterobacter species were also among the most frequent pathogens involved in surgical-site infections, as reported in the
NNIS report from October 1986 to April 1997. The isolation rate was 9.5% (with enterococci, coagulase-negative
staphylococci, S aureus, and P aeruginosa rates being 15.3%, 12.6%, 11.2%, and 10.3%, respectively).
Data on antibiotic resistance are available from the Intensive Care Antimicrobial Resistance Epidemiology (ICARE)
surveillance report. The rates of Enterobacter resistance to third-generation cephalosporins were 25.3% in ICUs, 22.3%
among non-ICU inpatients, 10.1% among ambulatory patients, and as high as 36.2% in pediatric ICUs.
[10,19]Carbapenem resistance among Enterobacteriaceae (including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, and E cloacae complex
species) rose significantly in US hospitals from 2001-2011.[20]
International
Enterobacter species have a global presence in both adult and neonatal ICUs. Surveillance data and outbreak case
reports from North and South America, Europe, and Asia indicate that these bacteria represent an important opportunistic
pathogen among neonates and debilitated patients in ICUs. 
The investigation of a multiclonal outbreak of Enterobacter cloacae infections in a neonatal ICU in France found over 469
gastrointestinally colonized infants, 30 infections including 2 cases of meningitis, and 12 deaths. The infection strains
were genetically diverse, supporting the hypothesis of multiple hygiene defects rather than dissemination of a single
bacterial clone. Their interventions included several hygienic preventive measures, education of staff, and limiting the use
of cephalosporin antibiotics. The outbreak eventually was successfully contained, although direct attribution to the
interventions was not conclusive.[21]
The prevalence of Enterobacter resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics, aminoglycosides, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(TMP-SMZ), and quinolones seems to be higher in certain European countries and Israel than in the United States and
Canada. Higher rates of Enterobacter resistance to fluoroquinolones and to beta-lactam and cephalosporin antibiotics due
to the production of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases have been reported in South America and the Asian and Pacific
regions.[22,23]
In a recent publication from Saudi Arabia, authors assessed epidemiologic patterns, resistance characteristics, and
clinical outcomes of E cloacae infections and also assessed the impact of the COVID-19 epidemic on resistance patterns
and mortality rates. They found a high number of E cloacae respiratory isolates, possibly due to higher risks with COVID
19 severe respiratory disease and intubation, but that the percentage of resistant isolates fell from 48.36% in 2019 (pre
pandemic) to 38% in 2020 and 37.6% in 2021. The ICU mortality rate was 40.5%. The authors proposed that the decrease
in resistant E cloacae isolates during the first 2 years of the COVID-19 epidemic may have been attributable to infection
control measures, the use of personal protective equipment by healthcare workers, and decontamination procedures.[24]
Mortality/Morbidity
Enterobacter infections cause considerable mortality and morbidity rates.
Enterobacter species can cause disease in virtually any body compartment. They are responsible for frequent and severe
nosocomial infections that require prolonged hospitalization, multiple and varied imaging studies and laboratory tests,
various surgical and nonsurgical procedures, and powerful and expensive antimicrobial agents. Most importantly,
Enterobacter infections that do not directly result in death cause considerable suffering in many patients, most of whom
already are afflicted with chronic diseases.
In patients with Enterobacter bacteremia, the most important factor in determining the risk for mortality is the severity of
the underlying disease. Higher 30-day mortality rates were noted in patients presenting with septic shock and increasing
Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II scores. Other factors implicated, independently or by association, in
the outcome of Enterobacter bacteremia include thrombocytopenia, hemorrhage, a concurrent pulmonary focus of
infection, renal insufficiency, ICU admission, prolonged hospitalization, prior surgery, intravascular and/or urinary
catheters, immunosuppressive therapy, neutropenia, antibiotic resistance, and inappropriate antimicrobial therapy.
Studies have demonstrated that empirical aminoglycoside use and appropriate initial antibiotic therapy were associated
with lower mortality rates, whereas vasopressor use, ICU care, and acute renal failure were associated with higher
mortality rates. Independent risk factors for mortality included cephalosporin resistance, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
resistance, mechanical ventilation, and nosocomial infection.[25,26]
Crude mortality rates associated with Enterobacter infections range from 15-87%, but most reported rates range from 20
46%. Attributable mortality rates are reported to range from 6-40%.
E cloacae infection is associated with the highest mortality rate of all Enterobacter infections.
Bacteremia with cephalosporin-resistant Enterobacter species is associated with a 30-day mortality rate that significantly
exceeds that of infections with susceptible strains (33.7% vs 18.6%).
Mortality rates associated with Enterobacter pneumonia are higher than those of pneumonia due to many other gram
negative bacilli. These rates range from 14-71%. As with bacteremia, the severity of the underlying disease is the major
factor that predicts outcome. Other factors that indicate an unfavorable outcome include the extent of the disease as seen
on chest radiographs, corticosteroid therapy, isolation of multiple pathogens from lower respiratory tract secretions, and,
possibly, treatment with a single antibiotic.
A review of 17 cases of Enterobacter endocarditis reported an overall mortality rate of 44.4%.
Race
Enterobacter infections have no reported or presumed racial predilection.
Sex
The male-to-female ratio of Enterobacter bacteremia is 1.3-2.5:1. This male predominance also is found in the pediatric
population.
Age
Enterobacter infections are most common in neonates and in elderly individuals, reflecting the increased prevalence of
severe underlying diseases at these age extremes. In the pediatric ICU setting, an age younger than 2.5 years is a risk
factor for colonization.
Enterobacter sakazakii, now known as Cronobacter sakazakii, has been reported as a cause of sepsis and meningitis,
complicated by ventriculitis, brain abscess, cerebral infarction, and cyst formation.[27] This clinical pattern appears to be
specific to C sakazakii in neonates and infants infected with this bacterium. C sakazakii also has been associated with
many outbreaks due to contaminated powdered formula for infants.[28,29]
The taxonomic reclassification of E sakazakii within a new genus "Cronobacter" within the Enterobacteriaceae was
proposed in 2007.[30]
Prognosis
The prognosis of E cloacae complex infections depends on numerous variables, including the infection site (eg,
bloodstream, meninges, lungs), time to diagnosis and treatment, antimicrobial resistance, and underlying host
vulnerabilities. The mortality rate generally is high, similar to infections caused by other invasive gram-negative bacilli.
Presentation
History
Enterobacter infections do not produce a unique enough clinical presentation to differentiate them clinically from other
acute bacterial infections. Consequently, details on the patient history and physical examination findings for each infected
body compartment are not provided in this article, with the exception of lower respiratory tract infections and bacteremia.
Details regarding similar disease presentations are available throughout Medscape Reference via the links provided in the
Differentials section.
Bacteremia
Most cases of Enterobacter bacteremia are nosocomial, frequently acquired in the ICU.
E cloacae, followed by E hormaechei, are the species implicated most frequently in Enterobactercloacae
complex bacteremia cases.
Mixed bacteremia is common (14-53%).
The portal of entry into the bloodstream is frequently unknown, but any infected organ, central line, or arterial catheter
may be the primary source of bacteremia.
Symptoms of Enterobacter bacteremia are similar to those of bacteremia due to other gram-negative bacilli.
Lower respiratory tract infections
The clinical presentations caused by Enterobacter lower respiratory tract infections include asymptomatic colonization,
tracheobronchitis, pneumonia, lung abscess, and empyema.
As with other respiratory pathogens, recent respiratory virus infection, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes
mellitus, alcohol abuse, malignancy, and neurologic diseases are risk factors for the acquisition of lower respiratory tract
infections.
Prior antimicrobial therapy may predispose to Enterobacter pneumonia.
Enterobacter species are a significant cause of ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Enterobacter species are major pathogens in early post–lung transplant pneumonia. In most cases, the bacteria are
transmitted from the donor.
Symptoms of Enterobacter pneumonia are not specific to these bacteria. Fever, cough, production of purulent sputum,
tachypnea, and tachycardia are usually present.
As with infections caused by organisms such as Streptococcus pneumoniae, many Enterobacter infections in elderly
debilitated patients do not cause a systemic inflammatory reaction. However, this clinical presentation is by no means
benign, and the associated mortality rate is particularly high in this population.
Skin and soft tissue infections
In most cases, Enterobacter skin and soft tissue infections are hospital-acquired and include cellulitis, fasciitis, myositis,
abscesses, and wound infections.
Enterobacter species can infect surgical wounds in any body site, and these infections are clinically indistinguishable
from infections caused by other bacteria.
In 1985, Palmer et al reviewed an outbreak of postsurgical Enterobactermediastinitis.[31] Cases varied in severity from
fulminant bacteremic infections to less-severe wound infections. The source was unknown, and a case-control analysis
suggested that surgical complications and prophylaxis with cephalosporins were associated with the infection. The level of
skin and wound colonization was high among patients who underwent cardiac surgery during this outbreak. The outbreak
was controlled with barrier isolation, restriction of contacts, and a reduction in the duration of cephalosporin prophylaxis.
Other Enterobacter wound infections have been reported in the literature. Infected body sites have included a posterior
spinal wound, burn wounds (many reports), and different types of injuries involving trauma to multiple sites. Some of the
infections were polymicrobial. Some authors have noted a trend of traditional wound bacteria (eg, S aureus) being
replaced by Enterobacter species and other nosocomial pathogens. Some trauma-related wound infections are acquired
before hospital admission. This was the case with agricultural mutilating wounds caused by corn-harvesting machines.
Gram-negative rods were predominant (81%), the most common being Enterobacter species and Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia.
Enterobacter species occasionally cause community-acquired soft-tissue infections in healthy individuals, including those
who sustain war-related or trauma-related injuries.
Endocarditis
A case report described a patient with E cloacae endocarditis on a porcine mitral heterograft. An accompanying literature
review disclosed 17 additional cases. Two thirds of the patients had underlying cardiac disease; most had mitral valve
infection, and 4 patients had concomitant aortic valve involvement.[32]
A few more case reports subsequent to this case series have been published in both English and non-English literature,
including one case of E asburiae causing both cotton fever and native valve endocarditis in an intravenous drug user.
[33,34]
Urinary tract infections
Enterobacter UTI is indistinguishable from a UTI caused by other gram-negative bacilli.
Pyelonephritis with or without bacteremia, prostatitis, cystitis, and asymptomatic bacteriuria can be caused by
Enterobacter species, as with Escherichia coli and other gram-negative bacilli.
Most Enterobacter UTIs are nosocomial and are associated with indwelling urinary catheters and/or prior antibiotic
therapy.
Intra-abdominal infections
Enterobacter species may be isolated together with colonic flora in intra-abdominal abscesses or peritonitis following
intestinal perforation or surgery.
A frequent cause of Enterobacter involvement is prior digestive-tract colonization by Enterobacter species during
hospitalization.
Case reports have described Enterobacter hepatobiliary sepsis, including emphysematous cholecystitis, suppurative
cholangitis, and hepatic gas gangrene in a child after liver transplantation. Hemorrhagic necrotizing pancreatitis developed
in a 72-year-old woman with obstructive jaundice.
Central nervous system infections
Neonatal meningitis resulting from C sakazakii infection is described in Age.
In 1993, Durand et al published a review of 493 episodes of acute bacterial meningitis.[35] This study involved patients
aged 16 years or older admitted to Massachusetts General Hospital from January 1962 through December 1988. Gram
negative bacilli were the etiologic agents in 4% and 38% of community-acquired and nosocomial meningitis, respectively.
In community-acquired infections, Enterobacter was isolated in one of the 9 cases of meningitis caused by gram-negative
bacilli (E coli 4 times, Klebsiella species 3 times, and Proteus once) and in 5 of the 57 episodes of nosocomial meningitis
(E coli 17 times, Klebsiella species 13 times, Pseudomonas species 6 times, and Acinetobacter species 6 times).
Other series were reported from various countries (United States, Iceland, United Kingdom, Senegal, Brazil). Gram
negative bacilli were not among the 5 most common causes of meningitis in any of these countries.
Ophthalmic infections
Enterobacter species account for a small fraction of postsurgical endophthalmitis and posttraumatic cases.[36]
Most ophthalmic infections are caused by gram-positive organisms, but Enterobacter species and Pseudomonas species
are among the most aggressive pathogens.
Bone and joint infections
Enterobacter species are occasionally implicated in septic arthritis, on both native and prosthetic joints, and can result in
osteomyelitis and discitis in adults and children.
Enterobacter bone and joint infections are usually more difficult to cure than those caused by S aureus. They often occur
in patients with complex surgical and medical histories.[37] The authors have observed relapses that required additional
treatment following the initial 6 weeks of intravenous therapy. 
Physical
Bacteremia
Physical examination findings consistent with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) include heart rate that
exceeds 90 bpm, a respiratory rate greater than 20, and temperature greater than 38°C or less than 36°C.
More than 80% of children and adults with Enterobacter bacteremia develop fever.
Hypotension and shock occur in as many as one third of cases.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation, jaundice, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and other organ failures reflect the
severity of septic shock.
Purpura fulminans and hemorrhagic bullae that usually are observed with meningococci or viruses causing hemorrhagic
fever may be part of the clinical presentation of Enterobacter bacteremia.
Ecthyma gangrenosum, usually associated with Pseudomonas or Aeromonas bacteremia, also may be observed.
Cyanosis and mottling frequently is reported in children with Enterobacter bacteremia.
Lower respiratory tract infections
The physical manifestations caused by Enterobacter are not specific for infection with these bacteria. Enterobacter lower
respiratory tract infections can manifest identically to those caused by S pneumoniae or other organisms.
The physical examination findings may include apprehension, high fever or hypothermia, tachycardia, hypoxemia,
tachypnea, and cyanosis. Patients with pulmonary consolidation may present with crackling sounds, dullness to
percussion, tubular breath sounds, and egophony. Pleural effusion may manifest as dullness to percussion and decreased
breath sounds.
Causes
Species of the Enterobactercloacae complex are gram-negative bacilli that belong to the Enterobacteriaceae family. Other
members of this family include Klebsiella, Escherichia, Citrobacter,Cronobacter, Serratia, Salmonella, and Shigella
species, among many others. Enterobacteriaceae are the most common bacterial isolates recovered from clinical
specimens. These bacteria have an outer membrane that contains, among other things, lipopolysaccharides from which
lipid-A plays a major role in sepsis. Lipid-A, also known as endotoxin, is the major stimulus for the release of cytokines,
which are the mediators of systemic inflammation and its complications.
In the microbiology laboratory, colonies of Enterobacteriaceae appear large, dull-gray, and dry or mucoid on sheep blood
agar. All Enterobacteriaceae ferment glucose and, consequently, are able to grow in aerobic and anaerobic atmospheres.
MacConkey agar is a lactose-containing medium that is selective for nonfastidious gram-negative bacilli such as
Enterobacteriaceae. Using the enzymes beta-galactosidase and beta-galactoside permeases, the most frequently
encountered species of Enterobacter strains activate the pH indicator (neutral red) included in MacConkey agar, giving a
pink or red stain to the growing colonies. Klebsiella and Enterobacter species may appear similar as mucoid colonies but
can be differentiated with a few specific tests. In contrast to Klebsiella species, Enterobacter organisms are motile,
usually ornithine decarboxylase-positive, and urease-negative. E sakazakii (reclassified into the Cronobacter genus in
2007) produces a characteristic yellow pigment.
Six different species comprise the E cloacae complex. Some have never been associated with human infections. The
most commonly isolated species include E cloacae and E hormaechei, followed by the rarely encountered Enterobacter
asburiae, Enterobacter gergoviae, Enterobacter taylorae, and Enterobacter cancerogenus. Enterobacter aerogenes was
renamed K aerogenes in 2017.[6]
DDx
Differential Diagnoses
Abdominal Abscess
Acute Bacterial Prostatitis and Prostatic Abscess
Acute Pancreatitis
Acute Pyelonephritis
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)
Acute Sinusitis
Adrenal Crisis
Ascites
Aspiration Pneumonitis and Pneumonia
Bacterial Pneumonia
Bacterial Sepsis
Biliary Disease
Bronchitis
Cellulitis
Cholangitis
Acute Cholecystitis
Chronic Pyelonephritis
Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) and Cystitis (Bladder Infection) in Females
Emphysema
Emphysematous Cholecystitis
Escherichia coli (E coli) Infections
Gallbladder Empyema
Emphysematous Pyelonephritis (EPN) Imaging
Infective Endocarditis
Klebsiella Infections
Liver Abscess
Lung Abscess
Mediastinitis
Meningitis
Meningococcal Infections
Meningococcemia
Morganella Infections
Neutropenia
Nongonococcal Infectious Arthritis
Parapneumonic Pleural Effusions and Empyema Thoracis
Pneumococcal Infections (Streptococcus pneumoniae)
Prostatitis, Bacterial
Septic Arthritis
Septic Shock
Splenic Abscess
Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS)
Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) in Males
Urinary Tract Infections in Pregnancy
Urinary Tract Obstruction
Workup
Workup
Laboratory Studies
Microbiological studies
The most important test to document Enterobacter infections is culture.
Direct Gram staining of the specimen also is very useful because it allows rapid diagnosis of an infection caused by gram
negative bacilli and helps in the selection of antibiotics with known activity against most of these bacteria. The specimen
submitted to the microbiology laboratory should represent the infectious process in evolution.
When the patient presents with signs of systemic inflammation (eg, fever, tachycardia, tachypnea) with or without shock
(eg, hypotension, decreased urinary output), blood cultures are mandatory. Older and debilitated patients or patients
receiving nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, steroids, or immunosuppressive therapy may be bacteremic in the
absence of any sign of inflammation. In addition, hypothermia is a characteristic of particularly severe sepsis.
In the laboratory, growth of Enterobacter isolates is expected to be detectable in 24 hours or less. Enterobacter species
grow rapidly on selective (ie, MacConkey) and nonselective (ie, sheep blood) agars. After growth in blood or on agar plates
has been confirmed, the bacterial colonies are identified through various, usually automated, methods. When identification
of a particular isolate is difficult, newer molecular (rRNA or PCR) methods can be used in certain laboratories. Mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) also is used in some laboratoties for organism identification, the detection of resistance genes
and in outbreak investigations.[38,39]
Blood culture details
Two sets (with one aerobic and one anaerobic bottle in each set) should be obtained 20-30 minutes apart, from 2 different
sites (if possible). If the patient has a central venous catheter, one set should be drawn through it. In the adult patient, 8
10 mL of blood should be collected in each bottle. Enterobacteriaceae ferment glucose and thus should grow in both
bottles.
Growth in the presence and absence of oxygen is very important early information permitting a presumptive diagnosis of
Enterobacteriaceae bacteremia because nonfermentative gram-negative bacilli (eg, Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter,
Stenotrophomonas) usually cannot grow in the absence of oxygen.
Lower respiratory tract specimens
Routine Gram staining of sputum is mandatory for every specimen to evaluate the degree of contamination.
A good specimen should show few epithelial cells and many white cells unless the patient is severely neutropenic. In the
case of pneumonia, the pathogen (ie, in this article, gram-negative bacilli) should be easily visualized with a high-power
lens under oil immersion.
A poor-quality specimen should not be cultured because the identification of organisms that colonize the oropharynx is
not helpful for the management of the infection and can cause confusion regarding the cause of the pneumonia. With a
lower respiratory tract infection, a significant number of organisms (gram-negative bacilli) should be visible after direct
staining. The threshold of optical detection of these bacteria is approximately 105 bacteria/mL. A positive culture result
with a negative Gram stain result likely represents colonization rather than infection, at least in untreated patients.
Endotracheal secretions obtained from intubated patients via fluid from bronchoalveolar lavage or bronchoscopy often are
contaminated with upper respiratory secretions, and the same caution should be applied in the interpretation of culture
results as in the interpretation of sputum specimens. However, bronchoscopy specimens obtained through a protective
shield are not contaminated or are only slightly contaminated. Specimens obtained by bypassing the oropharynx (eg,
transthoracic biopsy, open lung biopsy) are sterile, and any bacterial growth should be considered significant.
All other specimens
Pus and joint, pleural, pericardial, peritoneal, and cerebrospinal fluids; bile; urine; and biopsy specimens of the skin and
subcutaneous tissues, muscles, bone, and any other specimen should be promptly transported to the laboratory for rapid
Gram staining and culture (or kept refrigerated for the shortest possible period).
Ophthalmologic specimens, such as those obtained from patients with endophthalmitis, are so small that the frequent
recommendation is that they be injected into a blood culture bottle. This practice also is favored for potentially infected
ascites fluid, as some evidence in the literature suggests that this method is more sensitive than direct plating on agar.
Generally, inoculation of non-blood specimens into blood culture bottles requires direct coordination with and approval from
the microbiology laboratory.
Intravenous and intra-arterial catheters also should be cultured if catheter sepsis is suggested. The catheter tip is rolled
over the agar. Any growth of more than 15 colonies likely represents, according to studies by Maki et al, catheter infection
rather than contamination.[40]
Drugs to include for antimicrobial susceptibility testing
For nonfastidious gram-negative bacilli, potential antimicrobial activity should be tested in vitro. The choice of specific
antibiotics to be tested should reflect the availability of each drug in the pharmacy of each institution.
Penicillins should include ampicillin and at least one of the extended-spectrum penicillins (eg, carboxy, ureido, or
acylaminopenicillin) such as ticarcillin, mezlocillin, or piperacillin. The addition of ticarcillin-clavulanic acid or piperacillin
tazobactam is optional.
Cephalosporins include a first-generation drug of this class of antibiotics, such as cefazolin, and a third-generation drug
with and without Pseudomonas activity, such as ceftriaxone or ceftazidime, as well as the fourth-generation cephalosporin
cefepime.
Include at least one carbapenem, usually imipenem or meropenem, in accordance with available pharmaceutical agents in
the institution.
Include aminoglycosides, usually gentamicin and tobramycin. Amikacin may be tested primarily or when bacteria show
resistance to gentamicin and/or tobramycin.
Include a quinolone, such as ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin.
Include TMP-SMZ.
Some laboratories routinely add aztreonam.
A cephamycin, such as cefoxitin, is a useful addition to screen for some specific beta-lactamases, such as those of class
C (see Medical Care).
Other antibiotics that may be considered for testing include tigecycline, eravacycline, polymyxin B, colistin, cefidericol,
plazomicin, meropenem-vaborbactam, imipenem-cilastatin-relebactam, and ceftazidime-avibactam, especially when
particularly resistant organisms are identified.
Methods and results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing
Different methods of testing are available.
One of the most popular is the Kirby-Bauer disk method, which is simple, reliable, and inexpensive but does not quantify
the results in terms of minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC).
MIC methods include antimicrobial agar dilution, usually regarded as the criterion standard, or broth (micro) dilution.
Manual methods are more time-consuming than disk methods for measuring MIC. Automation for broth microdilution
methods is available from different manufacturers.
The results of sensitivity testing are expressed in millimeters of growth inhibition with disk testing or in mcg/mL in MIC
testing.
These results are compared to breakpoints issued by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) in order to
determine if an organism is susceptible, intermediately susceptible, or resistant to the tested antimicrobial agent. The
CLSI may not have breakpoints for some Enterobacter species or for some antibiotics.
Unfortunately, these elegant methods are not flawless, and reports of falsely susceptible (less frequently, falsely resistant)
bacteria are by no means rare in daily clinical practice.
Many resistance mechanisms are not detectable with these routine tests, and this is particularly true for the production of
some beta-lactamases (see Medical Care).
A good knowledge of the major resistance mechanisms is important for the interpretation of the crude sensitivity results.
Consultation with a senior microbiologist and/or an infectious disease specialist should be considered when the organism
is resistant to several antibiotics or when additional testing to newer antibiotics is being considered.
Other laboratory studies
Complete blood cell count, creatinine level, and electrolyte evaluation are part of the minimal investigation required for the
management of Enterobacter infections.
Fluid analysis (eg, cells and differential, proteins, glucose, and in some cases pH, lactate dehydrogenase, and amylase)
is required for pleural, articular, pericardial, peritoneal, and cerebrospinal fluids.
Urine analysis always is indicated for UTIs.
Tests for liver enzymes, creatine kinase, sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, bone marrow examination, and
microscopic examination of stained biopsy specimens are indicated according to the type of infection involved.
Imaging Studies
Imaging studies are an important part of the investigation and management of Enterobacter infections. Specific studies are
chosen based on the organ or systems involved in the infectious process.
For chest infections, serial chest radiography, chest ultrasonography, and CT scanning are useful when pulmonary
abscesses, pleural or pericardial effusions, empyema, and/or mediastinitis are a concern.
Intra-abdominal infections may require CT scanning and ultrasonography.
Endocarditis and intravascular infections may require echocardiography, preferably transesophageal. In some situations,
nuclear indium scanning may be helpful.
UTIs may require renal ultrasonography. Occasionally, CT scanning and pyelography (ie, intravenous or retrograde) are
useful.
Central nervous system and ophthalmic infections may require CT scanning and/or MRI.
Bone and joint infections may require plain radiography. CT scanning and/or MRI studies are helpful in selected cases of
soft-tissue infections, osteomyelitis, and septic arthritis. Nuclear medicine studies, bone and gallium scans in particular,
are frequently a useful complement to plain radiography. Findings from indium scans or other types of marked white blood
cell scans are somewhat more specific for the diagnosis of deep infections than gallium scan, although they may be less
sensitive. See the image below.
Radiograph of an open right tibial fracture in a 21-year-old male marine who was wounded when an improvised explosive
device detonated while he was on patrol in Iraq.
New technologies such as positron emission tomography (PET) scans may be indicated in very selective cases,
particularly for differentiation of neoplasia and infection.
Procedures
Procedures indicated for various Enterobacter infections may include the following:
Removal of central venous catheters within 72 hours of gram-negative bacilli bacteremic infections (This has been
shown to lower the risk for relapse.)
Surgical or percutaneous drainage of infected collections
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography or magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) for
biliary obstruction
Lumbar puncture for evaluation of CNS infections
Soft tissue or bone needle biopsy
Aspiration of joint fluid 
Histologic Findings
Along with signs of infection (leukocytic infiltration), histology should reveal the presence of bacterial rods.
Treatment
Approach Considerations
Investigate and attempt to eliminate all potential sites of infection (ie, attain good "source control"). For instance, an
identified abscess should be drained, or an infected joint should prompt surgical consultation for drainage. Remove any
potentially infected invasive devices, such as central intravenous or urinary catheters.
Medical Care
Antimicrobial therapy is indicated in virtually all Enterobacter infections. Considerations for empiric therapy include an
assessment regarding potential resistance to antibiotics, the infection site, anticipated achievable tissue concentrations of
antibiotic, and predicted antibiotic adverse effects. The Infectious Diseases Society of America's (IDSA's) regularly
updated guideline on the treatment of gram negative organisms resistant to antimicrobial agents contains good information
on optimal antibiotic dosing for infections at many sites.[41]
Occasionally, for a simple infection due to Enterobacter cloacae complex (eg, cystitis without concern for pyelonephritis)
macrodantin may be a reasonable choice. Fosfomycin may be used in some cases to treat simple cystitis caused by E
cloacae complex, but most US microbiology laboratories do not routinely test for antimicrobial susceptibility of this drug
against urinary tract isolates.
With few exceptions, the major classes of antibiotics used to manage serious infections with the E cloacae complex
include the beta-lactams, carbapenems, the fluoroquinolones, the aminoglycosides, and TMP-SMZ. Because most
Enterobacter species either are very resistant to many agents or can develop resistance during antimicrobial therapy, the
choice of appropriate antimicrobial agents is complicated. Consultation with experts in clinical infectious diseases and
microbiology usually is indicated, in addition to infectious disease pharmacists. In 2006, Paterson published a good
review of resistance among various Enterobacteriaceae.[42] Ritchie et al (2009) published a good discussion regarding
antibiotic choices for infection encountered in the ICU.[43]
Newer options to treat Enterobacter cloacae complex infections include tigecycline, eravacycline, ceftazidime/avibactam,
meropenem-vaborbactam, and plazomicin,[44] aztreonam in combination with ceftazidime-avibactam[45], and the recently
FDA approved cefidericol.[46]
Older options might include intravenous administration of polymyxin B or colistin, drugs that are rarely used, even in large
medical centers, and for which standard susceptibility criteria are not available. 
Emerging strategies to combat and treat ESKAPE pathogens including Enterobacter include consideration for
combination antibiotics including dual therapy (carbapenems in particular), phage therapy, antimicrobial peptides, silver
nanoparticles and photodynamic light therapy.[47] The reasoning for using a dual carbapenem regimen in carbapenem
resistant Enterobacterales infections is that one carbapenem acts as a "sacrificial" medication due to its greater affinity
for binding the bacterial carbapenemase, thus allowing the concomitant carbapenem to maintain an effectively higher
concentration against the infecting bacteria.[48,49]
Beta-lactams
With rare exceptions, E cloacae complex species are resistant to the narrow-spectrum penicillins that traditionally have
good activity against other Enterobacteriaceae such as E coli (eg, ampicillin, amoxicillin) and to first-generation and
second-generation cephalosporins (eg, cefazolin, cefuroxime). They also usually are resistant to cephamycins such as
cefoxitin. Initial resistance to third-generation cephalosporins (eg, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, ceftazidime) and extended
spectrum penicillins (eg, ticarcillin, azlocillin, piperacillin) varies but can develop during treatment.[10] The activity of the
fourth-generation cephalosporin (eg, cefepime) is fair, and the activity of the carbapenems (eg, imipenem, meropenem,
ertapenem) is excellent. However, resistance has been reported, even to these agents.
The bacteria designated by the acronym SERMOR-PROVENF (SER = Serratia, MOR = Morganella, PROV =
Providencia, EN = Enterobacter, F = freundii for Citrobacter freundii) have similar, although not identical, chromosomal
beta-lactamase genes that are inducible. With Enterobacter, the expression of the gene AmpC is repressed, but
derepression can be induced by beta-lactams. Of these inducible bacteria, mutants with constitutive hyperproduction of
beta-lactamases can emerge at a rate between 105 and 108. These mutants are highly resistant to most beta-lactam
antibiotics and are considered stably derepressed.
AmpC beta-lactamases are cephalosporinases from the functional group 1 and molecular class C in the Bush-Jacoby
Medeiros classification of beta-lactamases. They are not inhibited by beta-lactamase inhibitors (eg, clavulanic acid,
tazobactam, sulbactam). Ampicillin and amoxicillin, first- and second-generation cephalosporins, and cephamycins are
strong AmpC beta-lactamase inducers. They also are rapidly inactivated by these beta-lactamases; thus, resistance is
readily documented in vitro and may emerge rapidly in vivo. Jacoby (2009) published a good discussion about the
emerging importance of AmpC beta-lactamases.[50]
Third-generation cephalosporins and extended-spectrum penicillins, although labile to AmpC beta-lactamases, are weak
inducers.[10] Resistance is expressed in vitro only with bacteria that are in a state of stable derepression (mutant
hyperproducers of beta-lactamases). However, the physician must understand that organisms considered susceptible with
in vitro testing can become resistant during treatment by the following sequence of events: (1) induction of AmpC beta
lactamases, (2) mutation among induced strains, (3) hyperproduction of AmpC beta-lactamases by mutants (stable
derepression), and (4) selection of the resistant mutants (the wild type sensitive organisms being killed by the antibiotic).
For unknown reasons, extended-spectrum penicillins are less selective for developing resistance than third-generation
cephalosporins.[10] The in-therapy resistance phenomenon is less common with carboxy, ureido (eg, piperacillin), or
acylaminopenicillins. This phenomenon has been well documented as a cause of treatment failure with pneumonia and
bacteremia; however, it rarely occurs with UTIs.[51]
The fourth-generation cephalosporin cefepime is relatively stable to the action of AmpC beta-lactamases; consequently, it
retains moderate activity against the mutant strains of Enterobacter, hyperproducing AmpC beta-lactamases.
Nevertheless, resistance has been reported to develop when this antibiotic was used to treat Enterobacter infections.
Ceftazidime-avibactam initially was approved in 2015 for the treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections (cIAI)
when given with metronidazole and complicated urinary tract infections (cUTI) due to susceptible organisms including E
cloacae. It was subsequently approved for hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonia. It also was approved in
March 2019 for treatment in children older than 3 months with cIAI (given with metronidazole) and cUTI. This antibiotic has
been shown both in vitro and in vivo to have activity against multidrug-resistant E cloacae isolates.[52,53,8]
Ceftaroline, a "fifth generation" cephalosporin with activity against S aureus and other staphylococci, including methicillin
resistant isolates, has activity and resistance potential against E cloacae complex isolates similar to those of third
generation cephalosporins.[10] Ceftolozane-tazobactam had reliable activity against only wild-type E cloacae complex
isolates, but not against ESBL or AmpC-overproducing strains.[54] Therefore, neither of these antibiotics would be
considered useful for empiric treatment of serious Enterobacter infections.
Carbapenems are strong AmpC beta-lactamase inducers, but they remain very stable to the action of these beta
lactamases. As a consequence, no resistance to carbapenems, either in vitro or in vivo, can be attributed to AmpC beta
lactamases. However, Enterobacter species can develop resistance to carbapenems via other mechanisms. The New
Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase (NDM-1) has affected Enterobacter species around the world.[55,56,57]
The production of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) has been documented in Enterobacter. Usually, these
ESBLs are TEM1 -derived or SHV1 -derived enzymes, and they have been reported since 1983 in Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Klebsiella oxytoca, and E coli.[58] Bush et al classify these ESBLs in group 2be and in molecular class A in their beta
lactamase classification.[59] The location of these enzymes on plasmids favors their transfer between bacteria of the
same and of different genera. Many other gram-negative bacilli may also possess such resistant plasmids.
Bacteria-producing ESBLs should be considered resistant to all generations of cephalosporins, all penicillins, and to the
monobactams such as aztreonam, even if the in vitro susceptibilities are in the sensitive range according to the CLSI
breakpoints. In the past, the CLSI has cautioned physicians regarding the absence of a good correlation with
susceptibility when its breakpoints are applied to ESBL-producing bacteria.
The CLSI has published guidelines for presumptive identification and for confirmation of ESBL production by Klebsiella and
E coli, guidelines that often are applied to other Enterobacteriaceae. From the above, one can conclude that, when a
bacterium of the genus Enterobacter produces ESBL(s) (more than 1 ESBL can be produced by the same bacteria), it
does so in addition to the AmpC beta-lactamases that are always present, either in states of inducibility or in states of
stable derepression. With stable derepressed mutants, additional ESBL and carbapenemase detection laboratory
methods have been published by the CLSI.[60]
Carbapenems are the most reliable beta-lactam drugs for the treatment of severe Enterobacter infections, and fourth
generation cephalosporins are a distant second choice. The use of an extended-spectrum penicillin with a beta-lactamase
inhibitor (e.g. piperacillin-tazobactam) versus use of a carbapenem (eg, meropenem) remains a controversial issue for
therapy of ESBL-producing organisms.[61]
Resistance to carbapenems is rare but has been reported and is considered an emerging clinical threat posed by
Enterobacter species, as well as by other Enterobacteriaceae.[55,56] The beta-lactamases first implicated in imipenem
resistance were NMC-A and IMI-1, both molecular class A and functional group 2f carbapenemases, which are inhibited by
clavulanic acid and then able to hydrolyze all the beta-lactams not associated with a beta-lactamase inhibitor.
In August 2017, meropenem/vaborbactam was FDA approved for complicated urinary tract infections (cUTI) caused by
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE). The novel carbapenem/beta-lactamase inhibitor
meropenem/vaborbactam (Vabomere) specifically addresses carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) (eg, E coli,
K pneumoniae) by inhibiting the production of enzymes that block carbapenem antibiotics, one of the more powerful
classes of drugs in the antibiotic arsenal.[49] Bacteria that produce the K pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC) enzyme are
responsible for a large majority of CRE infections in the United States.
The approval was based on data from a phase 3 multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy study, TANGO-I
(n=550) in adults with cUTI, including those with pyelonephritis. The primary endpoint was overall cure or improvement and
microbiologic outcome of eradication (defined as baseline bacterial pathogen reduced to < 104 CFU/mL). Data showed
about 98.4% of patients treated with intravenous meropenem/vaborbactam exhibited cure/improvement in symptoms and a
negative urine culture result, compared with 94.3% of patients treated with piperacillin/tazobactam. Approximately 1 week
posttreatment, approximately 77% of patients treated with meropenem/vaborbactam had symptom resolution and a
negative urine culture result, compared with 73% of patients treated with piperacillin/tazobactam.[62]
Hyperproduction (stable derepression) of AmpC beta-lactamases associated with some decrease in permeability to the
carbapenems  also may cause resistance to these agents. In vitro low-level ertapenem resistance was not associated
with resistance to imipenem or meropenem, but high-level ertapenem resistance predicted resistance to the other
carbapenems.[63]
Metallo-beta-lactamases cause resistance across the carbapenem class, are transmissible, and have been associated
with clinical outbreaks in hospitals worldwide. In one reported outbreak of 17 cases of infection (2 due to Enterobacter
species), molecular studies demonstrated presence of a gene belonging to bla(VIM-1) cluster.[64] KPC-type
carbapenemases have emerged in New York City.[42] The new NDM-1 carbapenemase has already rapidly spread to
many countries.[23]
Aminoglycosides
Aminoglycoside resistance is relatively common and varies widely among centers. Amikacin and the new aminoglycoside
plazomicin may have better activity than gentamicin or tobramycin but usually are not administered to persons with renal
compromise owing to the high potential for toxicity. They usually are given in close consultation with pharmacists who
have infectious disease or antibiotic expertise.
Quinolones and TMP-SMZ
Resistance to fluoroquinolones is becoming more common and may be very high in some parts of the world. When
susceptibility to fluoroquinolones is demonstrated, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin have somewhat better activity than
moxifloxacin.
Resistance to TMP-SMZ is more common, and it should be selected only when the susceptibility report is available from
the microbiology laboratory and other drugs (eg, carbapenems) are not available for therapy or when "switch to oral"
therapy is being considered in eligible patients.
Colistin and polymyxin B
These drugs are being used more frequently to treat serious infection caused by multidrug-resistant organisms,
sometimes as monotherapy or in combination with other antibiotics.[8] Clinical experience, including documentation of
success rates and attributable mortality is broadening.[65,66] Heteroresistance to colistin was demonstrated in a few
Enterobacter isolates collected from ICU patients and was best identified using broth microdilution, agar dilution, or E-test
methods.[67] Polymyxin B was not as active against Enterobacter species as it was against other Enterobacteriaceae
but did demonstrate an MIC50 of less than or equal to 1, with 83% of Enterobacter isolates considered susceptible.[68]
One recent in vitro study documented a colistin MIC90 of 2 mcg/mL or less in more than 90% of Enterobacter isolates
from Canada.[69] A study of 89 carbapenem-nonsusceptible Enterobacteriaceae isolates from China showed that
polymyxin B was much more active than tigecycline.[70]
Tigecycline and eravacycline
Although not indicated specifically for Enterobacter pneumonia or bloodstream infections, tigecycline showed excellent in
vitro activity against these gram-negative bacilli.[71,72,73] In one laboratory study of multidrug-resistant gram-negative
bacilli, tigecycline maintained a low MIC against all of the organisms.[74,8]
Eravacycline is a new fluorocycline antibiotic in the tetracycline class. It is similar to tigecycline, but with expanded
activity.[75,76] It was approved by the FDA in 2018 for the treatment of intra-abdominal infections caused by susceptible
organisms, including E cloacae. Clinical data are not extensive but are growing. Neither tigecycline nor eravacycline has
FDA approval for use in patients younger than 18 years.
Cefidericol
Cefiderocol is a first in its class injectable siderophore cephalosporin that combines a catechol-type siderophore and
cephalosporin core with side chains similar to cefepime and ceftazidime. This structure and its unique mechanism of
action confer enhanced stability against hydrolysis by many beta-lactamases, including extended spectrum beta
lactamases such as CTX-M, and carbapenemases such as KPC, NDM, VIM, IMP, OXA-23, OXA48-like, OXA-51-like and
OXA-58. Cefiderocol’s spectrum of activity encompasses both lactose fermenting and non-fermenting Gram-negative
pathogens, including carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales.[47,77,49]
Cefiderocol has received US Food and Drug Administration approval for the treatment of patients aged 18 years or older
with complicated urinary tract infections and pyelonephritis caused by susceptible gram-negative
microorganisms: Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter
cloacae complex.
It received approval in 2022 for the treatment of patients aged 18 years or older with hospital-acquired bacterial pneumonia
and ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia, caused by the following susceptible gram-negative
microorganisms: Acinetobacter baumannii complex, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter cloacae complex, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Serratia marcescens.
Surgical Care
Surgical care is indicated as for other sources of infection: drainage or debridement of abscesses, infected collections, or
osteomyelitic foci.[45]
In some instances, the clinician must consider this option instead of percutaneous drainage with CT guidance. The
severity of the infection and the size of the collection to be drained are among the parameters to consider when choosing
the best option for the patient.
For endocarditis, valvular replacement is also indicated, particularly in patients with emboli or intractable heart failure.
Consultations
Enterobacter species cause severe and frequently life-threatening infections that can originate in virtually any body
compartment. Enterobacter infection may warrant consultation with many different subspecialists.
Consultation with an infectious diseases specialist helps in the selection of antimicrobial agents, taking into account the
multiple mechanisms of resistance to different classes of antimicrobial agents and the lack of correlation between crude in
vitro susceptibility results and true clinical efficacy for most of the beta-lactams.
Intensive care specialists, when appropriate, can help in the management of severe sepsis or septic shock.
General internal medicine and/or medical subspecialists (eg, cardiologists, gastroenterologists, nephrologists,
rheumatologists, pulmonologists) may be helpful.
Surgeons may help with the drainage of infected collections, if indicated, as well as with debridement of necrotic tissues.
Consult neonatologists for neonatal sepsis and, possibly, general pediatricians or pediatric subspecialists (including
pediatric infectious disease clinicians and pediatric surgeons).
Radiologists and nuclear medicine physicians may help select the best imaging study according to patient's specific
problems. Interventional radiologists may be needed to perform percutaneous drainage of infected collections.
A microbiologist can provide valuable assistance by educating clinicians regarding the correct interpretation of
susceptibility testing with this organism and selection of further testing, when indicated.
Pharmacists, in particular those who have specialty training in infectious diseases pharmaceuticals and prescribing
practices are often invaluable resources when treating patients with complicated, resistant infections due to Enterobacter
species.
Complications
Rapid development of new resistance is one of the most difficult complication challenges in treating patients
with Enterobacter infections. The clinician must always be aware of this potential, remain alert to signs of worseing or
relapsing infection in the patient, and prepared to alter antibiotic therapy when indicated.
Guidelines
Guidelines
Clinicians may find the following guidelines useful when treating patients with Enterobacter infections of central lines,
heart valves, or prosthetic joints:
The Infectious Diseases Society of America's (IDSA) guideline on the management of infected central lines is under
revision[78] 
The IDSA's guideline on the diagnosis and management of prosthetic joint infections[79]
In 2022 the IDSA published guidance for treating antimicrobial resistant gram negative pathogens with a focus on ESBL
producing and carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales as well as Pseudomonas aeruginosa with difficult to treat
resistance patterns.[45]
In December 2023 and July 2024, the IDSA updated their guideline on the treatment of antimicrobial resistant gram
negative infections with several modifications and updates compared to the 2022 and prior 2023 guidance.[41] Although
this guideline is not specific for Enterobacter species, it addresses antimicrobial resitant infections caused by
Enterobacterales, including E cloacae complex because of its higher propensity to carry AmpC inducible genes, or to
become ESBL or carbapenem resistant. The guideline contains separate sections that address issues in treating ESBL
producing, AmpC-B-lactamase producing and carbapenem resistant Enterobacterales, as well as a table of suggested
dosing of antibiotics for the treatment of antimicrobial resistant infections in adults, sorted by antibiotic name and specific
organ infections.
Guideline on the management of infected central lines by the Infectious
Diseases Society of America's (IDSA)
A clinical practice guideline on the management of infected central lines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America
(IDSA) was updated in 2009. It is under revision, and the key points are as follows[78]:
Catheter cultures should be done when a catheter is removed for suspected CRBSI, rather than routinely.
Qualitative broth culture of catheter tips is not recommended.
Catheter tip culture is recommended for CVCs, as well as specific inhibitors in culture media for anti-infective
catheter tips.
Growth of >15 cfu from a catheter tip by semiquantitative culture reflects catheter colonization.
Swab the exit site exudate if catheter infection is suspected.
For short-term catheters, roll plate technique is recommended for tip cultures.
For long-term catheters, growth of < 15 cfu/plate from insertion site and catheter hub suggests the catheter is not
the source of infection.
Blood samples should be obtained prior to antibiotic therapy, with skin preparation using alcohol or chlorhexidine.
Pair blood samples drawn from catheter and peripheral vein should be cultured for definitive CRBSI diagnosis.
Vancomycin is recommended for empirical therapy in settings with MRSA prevalence.
Linezolid should not be used for empirical therapy.
Antibiotic lock therapy can be used for catheter salvage.
4-6 weeks of antibiotic therapy for persistent fungemia or bacteremia after catheter removal.
6-8 weeks of therapy for osteomyelitis in adults.
Please see the complete guideline for more information.[78]
Guideline on the diagnosis and management of prosthetic joint infections by
the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
A clinical practice guideline on the diagnosis and management of prosthetic joint infections by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA) is summarized below[79]:
Preoperative evaluation for prosthetic joint infection (PJI)
Suspect PJI in patients with sinus tract or persistent wound drainage, acute painful prosthesis, or chronic painful
prosthesis especially in the absence of pain-free interval after implantation.
Evaluation includes detailed history and physical exam, and tests for sedimentation rate or CRP.
Plain radiographs and diagnostic arthrocentesis are recommended for suspected PJI.
Blood cultures and imaging studies should be used based on clinical suspicion.
Intraoperative diagnosis of PJI
Histopathological examination of periprosthetic tissue is reliable for diagnosing PJI.
Submitting multiple tissue samples for culture enhances microbiologic diagnosis.
Definitive signs of PJI include sinus tract, acute inflammation, purulence, and microbiologic results consistency.
Surgical management decisions should involve orthopedic surgeon consultation.
Medical treatment strategies:
Intravenous or oral antimicrobial therapy tailored to pathogen-specific profiles.
Monitoring guidelines should be followed for outpatient IV therapy.
Chronic suppressive oral antimicrobials may be considered based on individual circumstances.
Treatment options include debridement and retention, 2-stage exchange, 1-stage exchange, excision arthroplasty,
or amputation depending on infection status and patient factors.
These recommendations aim to guide the preoperative evaluation, intraoperative diagnosis, and medical treatment
strategies for prosthetic joint infections.
Please see the complete guideline for more information.[79]
Medication
Medication Summary
The goals of pharmacotherapy are to eradicate the infection, to reduce morbidity, and to prevent complications. Before
prescribing, and during therapy, always check for renal dose adjustments, as well as potential adjustments that may be
necessary in older patients, patients with obesity or hepatic dysfunction.
Antibiotics
The antimicrobials most commonly indicated in Enterobacter infections include carbapenems, fourth-generation
cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, and TMP-SMZ.
Carbapenems continue to have the best activity against E cloacae, E aerogenes, (now known as Klebsiella aerogenes)
and other Enterobacter species.[80] They are not affected by ESBLs. Imipenem-cilastatin and meropenem are used most
often. Ertapenem, approved more recently, is gaining clinical experience[81] but emerging resistance is a growing
concern.[82] In August 2017, meropenem/vaborbactam (Vabomere) was approved for complicated urinary tract infections
(cUTIs), including pyelonephritis, caused by susceptible Enterobacteriaceae: E coli, K pneumoniae, and E cloacae
species complex.[62]
First-generation and second-generation cephalosporins are inactive against Enterobacter infections. Third-generation
cephalosporins frequently show good in vitro activity against these organisms, but, as explained above, a significant risk
of developing full resistance during therapy exists. Resistance develops much less frequently with fourth-generation
cephalosporins because they are relatively stable to AmpC beta-lactamase but not (so far) to the less frequently
encountered ESBLs (see Medical Care). Third-generation cephalosporins are not indicated for the treatment of severe
Enterobacter infections, perhaps with the notable exception of uncomplicated infections.
Fluoroquinolones have good bactericidal activity against gram-negative bacilli; their bioavailability ranges from very good to
excellent (with the exception of norfloxacin). Newer quinolones have increased their spectrum toward gram-positive
organisms and, in some cases, toward anaerobes. Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin have the best activity against gram
negative bacilli and should generally be selected over the newer fluoroquinolones if clinically indicated.
Meropenem (Merrem IV)
Alternative to imipenem for severe Enterobacter infections. Carbapenem of choice for meningitis and for patients at risk for
seizures. Bactericidal broad-spectrum carbapenem antibiotic that inhibits cell wall synthesis. Effective against most gram
positive and gram-negative bacteria. Not degraded by renal dehydropeptidase-1. Has slightly increased activity against
gram-negative organisms and slightly decreased activity against staphylococci and streptococci compared to imipenem.
Imipenem/cilastatin (Primaxin IV)
For treatment of multiple-organism infections in which other agents do not have wide-spectrum coverage or are
contraindicated because of potential toxicity. DOC for severe Enterobacter infections, except for meningitis and other CNS
infections because of some reports indicating higher seizure potential. Hydrolyzed by the renal dehydropeptidase-1. To
overcome this urinary inactivation, cilastatin, an inhibitor of this renal enzyme, is administered in equal amounts.
Ertapenem (Invanz)
Bactericidal activity results from inhibition of cell wall synthesis and is mediated through ertapenem binding to penicillin
binding proteins. Stable against hydrolysis by various beta-lactamases, including penicillinases, cephalosporinases, and
extended-spectrum beta-lactamases. Hydrolyzed by metallo-beta-lactamases.
Cefepime (Maxipime)
Fourth-generation cephalosporin with good gram-negative coverage. Similar to third-generation cephalosporins but has
better gram-positive coverage.
Ciprofloxacin (Cipro)
Fluoroquinolone with good activity against pseudomonads and most gram-negative organisms, but no activity against
anaerobes. Inhibits bacterial DNA synthesis and, consequently, growth. Among fluoroquinolones, ciprofloxacin has the
best activity against the gram-negative bacilli (including Enterobacter). IV and PO formulations available. Oral
bioavailability is approximately 80%.
Levofloxacin (Levaquin)
Levofloxacin is an alternative to ciprofloxacin. It has the advantage of once daily dosing, whether administered IV or PO.
Used for pseudomonal infections and infections due to multidrug-resistant gram-negative organisms.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim, Bactrim DS)
Inhibits bacterial growth by inhibiting synthesis of dihydrofolic acid. Antibacterial activity of TMP-SMZ includes common
urinary tract pathogens, except P aeruginosa. Susceptibility of Enterobacter is generally good but varies among centers.
Polymyxin B
Binds to phospholipids, alters permeability, and damages bacterial cytoplasmic membrane.
Meropenem/vaborbactam (Vabomere)
Indicated for complicated urinary tract infections (cUTI) caused by carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE).
Vaborbactam is a nonsuicidal beta-lactamase inhibitor that protects meropenem from degradation by certain serine beta
lactamases such as K pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC). Vaborbactam does not have any antibacterial activity and
does not decrease the activity of meropenem against meropenem-susceptible organisms.
Tigecycline (Tygacil)
FDA approved for complicated intra-abdominal or skin and soft-tissue infections. A glycylcycline antibiotic that is
structurally similar to tetracycline antibiotics. Inhibits bacterial protein translation by binding to 30S ribosomal subunit and
blocks entry of amino-acyl tRNA molecules in ribosome A site. Complicated intra-abdominal infections caused by C
freundii, E cloacae, E coli, K oxytoca, K pneumoniae, E faecalis (vancomycin-susceptible isolates only), S aureus
(methicillin-susceptible isolates only), S anginosus group (includes S anginosus, S intermedius, S constellatus), B
fragilis, B thetaiotaomicron, B uniformis, B vulgatus, C perfringens, and P micros.
Ceftazidime/avibactam (Avycaz)
A new cephalosporin beta-lactamase–inhibitor antibiotic with extended activity against many gram-negative bacilli.
Avibactam is a member of a novel class of non–beta-lactam beta-lactamase inhibitors, the diazabicyclooctanes (DBO),
acting as a reversible covalent inhibitor. Compared to available inhibitors for clinical use, DBOs are more potent, have a
broader spectrum, and have a different mechanism of action. A unique feature of avibactam in contrast to earlier beta
lactamase inhibitors is that avibactam binds reversibly to beta-lactamases, allowing for recyclization and inhibition of
additional beta-lactamase molecules. Avibactam effectively inactivates class A (ESBLs and KPC), class C (AmpC), and
some class D (eg, OXA-48) beta-lactamases.
Eravacycline (Xerava)
Eravacycline is a fluorocycline antibacterial drug within the tetracycline class. Has expanded activity compared to
tigecycline. Available for parenteral administration only. Not approved for use in children.
Plazomicin (Zemdri)
Plazomicin is an aminoglycoside antibacterial indicated for the treatment of complicated urinary tract infections (CUTI),
including pyelonephritis, in patients aged 18 years or older. As only limited clinical safety and efficacy data are available, it
is reserved for use in patients who have limited or no alternative treatment options. To reduce the development of drug
resistant bacteria and maintain effectiveness of plazomicin and other antibacterial drugs, it should be used only to treat
infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by susceptible microorganisms. Dosing adjustments are
required in patients with renal impairment.
Colistimethate (Coly Mycin M)
Parenteral formulation indicated for the treatment of acute or chronic infections due to sensitive strains of certain gram
negative bacilli. It is particularly indicated when the infection is caused by sensitive strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Not indicated for Proteus or Neisseria infections. Coly-Mycin M Parenteral has proven clinically effective in the treatment
of infections due to the gram-negative organisms Enterobacter aerogenes, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and P
aeruginosa.
siderophore cephalosporin
cefiderocol
A new class of antibiotic: an injectable siderophore cephalosporin that combines a catechol-type siderophore and
cephalosporin core with side chains similar to cefepime and ceftazidime. This structure and its unique mechanism of
action confer enhanced stability against hydrolysis by many beta-lactamases. It is active against many gram negative
bacilli, including both fermenter and non-fermenters. It is not active against gram positive or anaerobic organisms.
Monobactams
Aztreonam has activity against some Enterobacter isolates, but not usually against more resistant strains. Laboratory
testing must be done to confirm sensitivity to this drug before using it alone to treat serious infections. It has been
combined with avibactam to broaden its activity against carbapenemase producing isolates, but the drug is not yet FDA
approved. It has been used in combination with ceftazidime-avibactam to treat bloodstream and other serious infections
caused by metallo-β-lactamase producing Enterobacterales.
Follow-up
Inpatient & Outpatient Medications
Enterobacter infections that are improving may warrant switch from an intravenous regimen to an oral medication such as
a quinolone or TMP-SMZ in accordance with sensitivity testing, when feasible. Ciprofloxacin (500-750 mg PO q12h if renal
function is normal) is an acceptable alternative in patients who are able to tolerate oral medication as long as they are not
coadministered with products that contain divalent cations (calcium or dairy products, iron, magnesium, zinc). There are
no specific guidelines for the treatment of endocarditis caused by enteric gram-negative bacilli. The AHA recommends
involvement of an infectious diseases specialist, cardiothoracic surgeon, as well as consideration for combination
antibiotic therapy ideally using antibiotics from two different classes. 
Some patients with Enterobacter infections may require longer therapy with intravenous antibiotics. In those who meet
criteria for home antibiotic therapy, the selected intravenous medication should not usually require more than 3-times-daily
infusion. Ertapenem and tigecycline may be considered for such patients in conjunction with antimicrobial susceptibility
testing results, infectious disease specialists and home infusion therapy experts. Close monitoring while on antibiotics
and after stopping antibiotics is essential.
Deterrence/Prevention
When hospital (ICU) outbreaks of Enterobacter infections occur, isolation and barrier protection should be implemented.
Isolation precautions should also be implemented when a multidrug-resistant organism is isolated.
Hand washing or use of alcohol or other disinfecting hand gels by health care workers between contacts with patients
prevents transmission of these and other nosocomial bacteria. This is particularly true in ICUs.
Prior antibiotic administration is a major factor for colonization and secondary infections with these multiple-antibiotic
resistant organisms. Clinicians are advised to avoid unnecessary administration of antimicrobial agents or to avoid
unnecessary prolonged administration. For surgical prophylaxis, administration of antibiotics for longer than 24 hours is
rarely justifiable.
Education programs for physicians and hospital personnel regarding risk reduction for transmission of Enterobacter
species and other nosocomial pathogens should be implemented in every hospital. This is usually the responsibility of the
Infection Prevention and Control team.
Comprehensive guidelines regarding isolation for and prevention of nosocomial infections and management of infections by
multidrug-resistant organisms (eg, ESBL-producing Enterobacter species) in health care settings are available at the
Centers for Disease Control Web site (Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission of Infectious Agents in
Healthcare Settings 2007; Management of Multidrug-Resistant Organisms In Healthcare Settings, 2006).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has expanded its guidelines for preventing the spread of
carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE). Noting that most cases of CRE found in the United States have been
isolated from patients who received overnight treatment in medical facilities outside the country, the new
recommendations are as follows[83,84]:
When a CRE is found in a patient who within the previous 6 months had stayed overnight in a non-US health-care
facility, the isolate should undergo confirmatory susceptibility testing and the carbapenem resistance mechanism
should be determined
Rectal screening cultures should be ordered for any patient admitted to a health-care facility in the United States
after being hospitalized within the previous 6 months in another country; such patients should be placed on contact
precautions until the results of the screenings are available.
Prognosis
