Klebsiella Pneumoniae: What to Know
What Is Klebsiella Pneumoniae?
Written by R. Morgan Griffin, Emily Delzell Medically Reviewed by Zilpah Sheikh, MD on November 21, 2023
Klebsiella pneumoniae are a common type of bacteria found in your intestines. They are normally harmless. But Klebsiella pneumoniae can be
dangerous if they get into other parts of your body, especially if you’re already sick. They can turn into “superbugs” that are very hard to fight
with antibiotics. The germs can give you pneumonia, infect your wound or blood, and cause other serious problems. 
Who Is at Risk for Klebsiella Pneumoniae?
Infections are rare in healthy people because their immune systems are strong enough to fend off the germs. But infections are more likely if
you have health problems like:
Alcoholism
Cancer
Diabetes
Kidney failure
Liver disease
Lung disease
Other things that can increase your risk are:
Taking certain antibiotics for a long time 
Being older
Being in the hospital
Having an IV or a catheter (a tube connected to your bladder to drain pee)
Having an open wound
Having surgery
Using a ventilator to help you breath
Taking corticosteroids
Klebsiella Pneumoniae Causes
These germs don’t spread through the air. You need direct contact to get sick. One way would be to touch a cut on your skin with dirty hands.
Most Klebsiella pneumoniae transmission happens in hospitals, nursing homes, and other places with lots of sick people. Health care workers
can spread the germs if they don't wash and sanitize their hands often. The germs can also spread when they get on medical devices like:
IV tubes that go into a vein to give medicines
Endotracheal tubes and ventilators, which help you breathe
Urinary catheters, which drain pee away when you're not able to use the bathroom
Klebsiella Infections
Klebsiella pneumoniae are a type of bacteria that can cause many different infections. You are much more likely to pick up these germs when
you are in the hospital.
These germs are the most common cause of pneumonia you get while you’re in the hospital. This is also known as hospital-acquired
pneumonia. You’re much less likely to get pneumonia caused by these bacteria outside of hospitals. Klebsiella pneumonia you pick up in the
community makes up only 3% to 5% of cases.
Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteria can cause infections in other parts of your body. These include:
Bloodstream infections (bacteremia or septicemia)
Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Meningitis 
Pus-filled pockets, or abscesses, in your liver
Wound infections
Surgical infections
Skin infection (cellulitis)
Klebsiella pneumoniae
 in urine
If Klebsiella pneumoniae bacteria get into your urinary tract, they can cause an infection. This is more likely if you’ve had a catheter put in during
a hospital stay. 
UTIs caused by Klebsiella pneumonia can be life-threatening, especially in people who have serious illnesses. It’s important to let your doctor
know if you have any symptoms of a UTI, especially if you’ve been hospitalized.
Klebsiella Pneumoniae Symptoms
The symptoms of Klebsiella pneumoniae infection depend on what part of your body these germs have invaded.
Symptoms of Klebsiella pneumonia:
Fever
Cough
Chest pain
Trouble breathing
Reddish, jelly-like mucus
Symptoms of UTIs include:
Pain when you pee
A need to pee often
An urgent need to pee
Pain under your pubic bone
Blood in your pee
Symptoms of meningitis:
High fever that comes on suddenly
Bad headache
Neck stiffness
Upset stomach and vomiting
Sensitivity to light
Extreme drowsiness
Confusion
Seizures
Drowsiness and difficulty waking up 
Loss of appetite, thirst, or both 
Symptoms of bloodstream infections:
Fever
Chills
Fast heart rate
Low blood pressure
Dizziness
Pain in your abdomen
Nausea and vomiting
Diarrhea
Fast breathing
Confusion
Delirium 
Skin rash or discolored skin 
Warm skin
Hypothermia, or a low body temperature 
Symptoms of liver abscesses:
Fever
Chills
Pain in the upper right side of your abdomen
Symptoms of wound and surgical infections:
Redness
Warmth
Swelling
Slow healing
Fever
Pain
Pus oozing from the wound
Symptoms of skin infection:
Pain; sometimes extreme pain is the only symptom
Swelling
Redness
Klebsiella Pneumoniae Diagnosis
Your doctor can do a number of tests to diagnose pneumonia or other infections caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae. Depending on what kind of
infection you have, they may test your:
Blood
Sputum (a mix of saliva and mucus that you may cough up)
Pee
Your doctor may also use some kind of imaging, such as a chest X-ray to help diagnose Klebsiella pneumoniae infection.
Klebsiella Pneumoniae Treatment
Antibiotics are the main treatment for Klebsiella pneumoniae infections. Your doctor will send your blood, urine, sputum, or other body fluid to
a lab to find out which antibiotic is the best one to treat your infection.
Your doctor will start treatment as soon as they learn which antibiotic you should take. Examples include either a cephalosporin (such as
cefepime) or a fluoroquinolone (such as ciprofloxacin) by themselves, or one of these antibiotics combined with an aminoglycoside. 
You will probably take antibiotics for 2 weeks. Take them just as it says on the bottle. If you stop taking them too soon, the infection may come
back.
If you have an antibiotic-resistant infection, your doctor will decide the best way to treat it. They’ll probably try a different type of antibiotic or a
combination of them.
Klebsiella Pneumoniae Prevention
It can be hard to prevent infection when you’re in the hospital. But you can do things to avoid transmitting the bacteria.
Always wash your hands before you:
Eat
Touch your eyes, nose, or mouth
Change bandages on a cut
Always wash your hands after you:
Use the bathroom
Blow your nose, cough, or sneeze
Touch anything in doctor’s offices or hospitals
If you check into the hospital for treatment, take these extra steps to protect yourself:
Before you go, make sure to follow your treatment plan for any ongoing health conditions, like diabetes.
Ask the staff what they do to prevent infections.
Tell your nurse or doctor if your bandages get wet or IV tubes fall out of place.
If you need a catheter or other device, ask to have it taken out as soon as you don't need it anymore.
Ask anyone who comes into your room to wash their hands first.
Teach your family about fever and other signs of infection so they can call for help quickly.
Outlook
Klebsiella infections are are very dangerous, and up to 50% of people with pneumonia caused by these germs die. Klebsiella bloodstream
infections may kill 20% to 40% of those affected, and the death rate for people who are in an intensive care unit can be as high as 67%.
You are at higher risk for a poor outcome if you are older than 65 and if you have:
Diabetes
Alcohol use disorder
Bacteremia 