The fate of Escherichia colithrough water treatment and indistribution
1. SUMMARY
The removal of E. colibacteria at each stage of water treatment is presented, showing how the filtration stages contribute most to reduction of bacterial numbers in the water.
 At treatment works without filtration stages, the emphasis
 is put on catchment management to limit contamination of
 the raw water and ensure that the numbers of viable E. coli
 in the source water remain low. Routine monitoring of the
 raw water provides data on seasonal trends in numbers of
 E. colibacteria and allows effective management of supply.
 In the UK there is no evidence that E. coligrows in the
 water distribution system, whether in the planktonic stage
 or within biofilms (O'Neill et al. 1997). The detection of E.coli in the distribution system is rare and prompts a thorough investigation. Repeat samples are taken from the
 point which originally failed, along with a number of
 hydraulically linked samples including samples from
 hydrants. The response to the detection of E. coli is discussed.
 A series of experiments carried out on a pilot pipe system is briefly described and the results discussed in relation
 to the routine samples taken in the Thames Water Supply area.
2. INTRODUCTION
 The coliform group of organisms, and more specifically Escherichia coli, have been used as indicators of water quality almost since they were proposed by Escherich in 1885,
 that the absence of these organisms is
 evidence of the absence of waterborne pathogens.
 The Water Supply (Water Quality) Regulations (1989)
 set the standard that water supplied for human consumption should not contain any E. coli bacteria in 100 ml of
 water. The regulations also specify sampling requirements;
 at the point that the water enters supply from the treatment works and at treated water reservoirs and at customers taps in distribution.
In the UK, improvements in treatment processes have
 ensured that the water entering distribution generally has
 no detectable coliforms. Since 1991, the frequency of E.coli failures in water samples taken at customers taps hasdecreased 10fold (Table 1) (DWI 1998).
 Ingress of contaminated water into the distribution system is most likely to occur when the integrity of a pipe is
 breached, for example during work on mains or due to
 damage to pipes which may not be detected immediately.
 Ingress can also occur where the structure of service reservoirs is breached.
3. REMOVAL OF E. COLI DURING
 TREATMENT
 3.1. Surface water works
 Surface water from direct river abstraction or after reservoir storage can be treated by a number of different processes. In the Thames region the majority of surface water
 is treated by storage in open reservoirs followed by a combination of ozonation and filtration stages. Figure 1 shows
 typical data for the number of E. coli in the raw water
(expressed as the 10glO E. coli per litre sample). The
©2000 The Society for Applied Microbiology 88, 117S-123S
118S S.M. MCMATH AND D.M. HOLT
Table1 E. colifailures ex-works 1991-98 (Thames region)
Year
% samplescontaining E. coli
Month
Fig.1 Numbers of Escherichia coliin water supplying surface
 water treatment works
 seasonal vanation is evident; higher numbers of E. coli
 generally coincide with the months of higher rainfall.
 There have been a number of studies that demonstrate
 the removal of E. coli through a multistage treatment
 works. Individual processes vary in their efficiency of
 removal. In some instances there may be a net increase
 across a treatment process due to proliferation or capture
 and then delayed release ofbacteria.
 Research carried out at Kempton Park Advanced Water
 Treatment centre showed that when coliforms and E. coli
 are present in the influent to the GAC adsorbers they can
 be retained and then shed over a period of several days
 (Holt 1993).
 The process diagram (Fig. 2) shows how E. colibacteria
 are removed through a multistage water treatment works
 which receives water from the river Thames via storage
 reservoirs. There are two streams, the first consisting of
 pre-ozonation, rapid gravity filters followed by main ozonation and then three parallel slow sand filters. Stream 2 consisted of rapid gravity filters, ozonation, granular activated
 carbon (GAC) filters and then three parallel slow sand filters. The water from both streams were then disinfected using chlorination with postammoniation. For stream I, it can be seen that the main ozonation and slow sand filter
 stages result in the highest reduction in numbers of viable
 E. colibacteria. For stream 2 it can be seen that the GAC
 filters have the biggest impact on E. coli numbers. For both
 streams viable E. coliwere not detected after chlorination.
 Chemical disinfection procedures used in the Water
 Industry were originally devised on a basis of sufficient
 chlorine contact to ensure the elimination of resistant
 organisms such as Coxsacckie A virus. This ensured that
 more susceptible pathogens would be killed during chemical disinfection. Whilst certain strains of E. coli are more
 susceptible to disinfection than Coxsacckie A viruses, it
 provides a relatively simple inexpensive tool. This, together
 with the measurement of chlorine residuals and mainte
 nance of adequate disinfection contact times, provides a
 robust process monitoring system for ensuring the effectiveness ofchemical disinfection ofdrinking water.
3.2. Groundwater sites
 At groundwater sites the main strategy to ensure that
 strains of E. coli (and other pathogens) do not enter the
 raw water supply is to protect the source. This involves
 ensuring that the boreholes are integrally sound and that
 there is no possibility for the ingress of contaminated
 water, for example during periods of heavy rainfall. The
 areas around the boreholes are physically protected to pre
 vent the grazing of farm animals or walking of dogs over
 the site. Raw water quality is monitored routinely for viable
 E. coli and trigger levels (e.g. 10 E. coli 100ml-1 in a raw
 water sample) are set, above which the works will be run to
 waste to prevent the water entering supply. Risk assessments are carried out to determine the frequency of monitoring required.
All groundwater sources are also chemically disinfected
 with a sufficient chlorine residual and contact time to eliminate bacterial and viral pathogens.
4. FATE OF E. COLI IN DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEMS
 There has been much work reported on the fate of water
 borne organisms artificially introduced into experimental
 systems, with often conflicting results (Camper et al. 1991,
 1998; Fass et al. 1996; Block et al. 1997; Wiedenmann et al.
 1997; Sibelle et al. 1998). Some workers have postulated
 that E. coli could grow in the distribution system within
 13652672, 2000, S1, Downloaded from https://enviromicro-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2000.tb05339.x by Egyptian National Sti. Network (Enstinet), Wiley Online Library on [10/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
 ©2000 The Society for Applied Microbiology, Journal ofAppliedMicrobiology Symposium Supplement88, 1178-1238
 FATE OF E. COLliN TREATED WATER 1195
 STREAM 1
4
Fig.2 Removal of Escherichia coliby
 Advanced Biological Filtration (trial 2).
 Numbers in boxes are average numbers of
 E. coli1-1 using one years data. SSF, Slow
 sand filters; GAC, Granlular Activated Carbon biofilms on the pipe walls (Block et al. 1997), whilst other have suggested biofilms as a source of environmental coli
 forms in distribution (Baylis 1930; Hudson et al. 1983;
 Wierenga 1985; LeChevallier et al. 1996). However, these
 studies are small scale and, whilst valuable for increasing
 understanding of the factors governing growth of coliform
 bacteria, they cannot create the conditions found in distribution systems. There is no convincing published evidence
 that E. coli can grow within drinking water systems in the
 UK.
 For the purposes of water quality monitoring, the distribution system is divided into water supply zones. Samples
 are taken in each water supply zone at a frequency determined by the population within the zone. All the regulatory samples taken in distribution are taken from
 customers' taps.
 If a water sample from a customer's tap contains viable
 E. coli bacteria then the customer is advised to boil their
 water before drinking, the local health authority are
 informed and repeat samples are taken from the tap which
 failed, an associated hydrant of the feeding main and 2-5
 hydraulically linked samples from other properties in the
 vicinity. Swabs are also taken of the inside of the customers
 taps. These repeat samples are analysed for a number of
 microorganisms in addition to the total number of coliform
 bacteria and E. coli and may include salmonellas, campylo
 bacters, viruses and pseudomonads. If all the repeat samples are clear then the boil notice is lifted and no further action is taken. If the swab taken from the customer's tap
 fails, then the failure can be attributed to the customer's
 internal plumbing and the local environmental health officer is informed. In the extremely rare event that any of the
 hydraulically linked samples fail, then a boil order may be
 put on the water pressure area that may encompass more
 than one water supply zone, further samples taken and
 hydraulic models used to identify the possible source of the
 contamination.
 5. PIPE-RIG EXPERIMENTS
 This work was undertaken to investigate the fate of coli
 form bacteria in a 1·3-km long drinking water distribution
 system after the introduction of tertiary treated sewage effluent (i.e. to simulate a contamination event). The
organisms were introduced into the main body of water
and into a 'dead-end' in the system.
5.1. Experimental pipe-rig
 The pipe-rig at Kempton Park Advanced Water Treatment
 Centre is a 1·3-km long pipe system with an internal diameter of 110mm that was purpose built for studying the
 effects of microbial growth on water quality in distribution
 systems. The pipe-rig is described in a number of papers
 (Holt 1993 and McMath et at. 1997a, b) and a schematic is
 presented in Fig. 3. It is generally operated under low flow
 Water supply
 Waste
 + t
 conditions (0·081s-I) to simulate the conditions at the far
 reaches of a distribution system. Low levels of chloramine
 were maintained throughout the pipe-rig during these
 experiments.
 5.2. Coliform inoculum
 Effluent from one of Thames Water's sewage treatment
 works receiving only domestic wastewater was used in
 these experiments. Processes at the treatment works
 include primary screening, secondary treatment provided
 by trickling filters and tertiary lagoons.
 The effluent from these lagoons discharges into a small
 stream, of which the effluent is the bulk of the flow. This contains coliforms adapted to low temperatures and relatively low nutrient levels in a water environment. The annual average total number of coliform bacteria, for the
 tertiary effluent, was 9·6 x 104 coliforms ml-I , with an
 average of 3·0 x 103 faecal coliforms ml-I .
5.3. Jar tests
 A series of jar tests was carried out to determine the survi
 val time of the effluent coliforms in pipe-rig water at 9°C
 and 15°C. The lower water temperature is the average
 water temperature in the distribution system in the winter
 months in the Thames region, whilst the higher tempera
 ture represents the water temperature in early summer.
 These experiments were carried out on the same day as the
 direct inoculation experiments (see Section 5.4). Aliquots
 of the effiuent were mixed in sterile sample bottles with
 pipe-rig water to give effiuent concentrations of 1% and
 10% for the lower temperature experiment and 1%, 5%
 and 10% at for the higher temperature experiment. These
 concentrations are similar to those expected in a plug flow
 of inoculum injected into the pipe-rig, as in the experiment
 described in Section 5.4. At predetermined time intervals,
 sodium thiosulphate tablets (0·05%) were added to the bottles to neutralize the chlorine residual, the samples refrigerated and analysed for total coliforms including E. coliusing
 a commercial kit, Colilert (IDEXX Laboratories Limited;
 Chalfont St Peter).
 The results of the experiments carried out at the higher
 temperature are shown in Fig. 4, and show that E. colisurvive for the first six hours. There were no viable E. coli
 detected in any of the bottles left for more than 6h.
 5.4. Direct inoculation experiments
 A 25 litre aliquot of effiuent (imitating an ingress event)
 was injected into the experimental pipe-rig at a point 400m along its length. One litre water samples were taken at
 the next sample point, 400m downstream of the inoculation point, starting 12h after inoculation. The experiment
 was carried out when the water temperature was 9°C and
 again when the water temperature reached 15°C. The samples were analysed both using the Colilert method, as for
 the jar test samples, and using a standard membrane filtration method using membrane lauryl sulphate (MLS)
 method (filtration onto a 0·45-Jim membrane which is
 placed on a sterile pad soaked in the MLS broth and then
 incubated at 37°C for 24h).
 In the 9°C experiment, a 25 litre aliquot of a solution of
 1% lithium chloride (BDH) was injected into the experi
 mental pipe-rig 10min after the inoculation of the effiuent.
 The water was then sampled for a period 12-24 h after
 inoculation, to determine the approximate time taken for
 the aliquot of effiuent to travel from the inoculation point
 to the sample point 400m downstream. Theoretical travel
 time is estimated at 15h.
 Strains of E. coliand other coliforms were not detected
 in any of the samples taken downstream of the inoculation
 point.
 5.5. Dead-end experiments
 The bypass section at 900m along the length of the experi
 mental pipe-rig, was initially isolated for 25d to allow
 development of a biofilm on the pipe walls. The pipe-rig
 water was drained and tertiary effiuent (see Section 5.2)
 pumped into the bypass section in order to investigate the
 survival of coliforms under zero flow conditions of a distri
 bution system, i.e. in a dead-end. Numbers of viable coli
 form bacteria and E. coli in effiuent samples from the
 bypass section were then monitored three times a week
 until they reached a consistent low level (three consecutive
 samples with < 2 viable coliform bacteria ml-1 ), when the
 water flow from the main rig was directed through the
 bypass. This introduced the effiuent into the main rig and
 sloughed off any biofilm present on the pipe walls. The
 fate of any coliforms adapted to growth under zero flow
 and on pipe walls was then studied over time. One litre
 water samples were taken 1m and 400m downstream of
 the bypass and analysed for total coliforms (using a standard membrane filtration method) for a period of 30d.
 These experiments were carried out with water temperature ranges of 6-9°C (winter temperatures) and 17-22°C
 (summer temperatures).
 Figure 5 shows the survival of coliforms and E. coli in
 the bypass (dead-end) over a 32-d period. The numbers of
 E. coliin the dead-end decreased by a factor of 104 in the
 first 2 d. After 5 d the numbers had decreased to 1 E. coli
 100ml-l, with no E. coli detected after this time. Other
 coliform bacteria survived for 32d at the higher temperature. Coliform bacteria were not detected in any of the
 samples taken after the bypass water had been released into
 the main pipe-rig. This indicates that E. coli and other coli
 forms had not grown within the biofilm on the pipe surface
 under favourable distribution system conditions.
 5.6. Biofilm sloughing experiment
 One week following the second bypass experiment the flow
 rate in the main pipe-rig was increased 12 times, to establish if coliforms were present in sediments or in biofilm on
 Fig.5 Coliform and Escherichiacoli survival in dead-end. (.)
 total coliforms, (0) E. coli and (0) temperature
 the pipe wall. Previous experiments on the experimental
 pipe-rig have shown that a flow rate increase of 10 times
 the baseline flow will cause the re-entrainment of sediment
 and biofilm into the water (McMath et al. 1997b).
 Before the flow rate was returned to normal, the pipe-rig
 water was directed from the main pipe-rig into the bypass
 section at a flow rate of 41 sec-I. One litre samples were
 taken 1m and 400m downstream of the point where the
 bypass water enters the main pipe-rig and analysed for coli
 forms and E. coli using the standard membrane filtration
 method.
 Coliform bacteria were not detected in any of the water
 samples analysed indicating that they were unable to colonize and proliferate in biofilms on the pipe wall.
6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
 There is a substantial base of research which shows that
 strains ofE. coli are removed by water treatment processes
 and this organism is a simple and useful measure of micro bial process removal efficiency.
 The studies on a large scale pilot distribution system
(1·3 km) show that E. coli can survive for several d in a
 dead-end section of the distribution, but does not proliferate within a biofilm. As E. coli bacteria appear not to proliferate within biofilms and have limited survival within
 distribution systems, it serves as a valuable indicator offaecal contamination for drinking water supplies.