The Detection Method of Escherichia coli in Water Resources

Abstract. This article reviews several approaches for Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria
 detection from conventional methods, emerging method and goes to biosensor-based
 techniques. Detection and enumeration of E. coli bacteria usually required long duration of
 time in obtaining the result since laboratory-based approach is normally used in its assessment.
 It requires 24 hours to 72 hours after sampling to process the culturing samples before results
 are available. Although faster technique for detecting E. coli in water such as Polymerase
 Chain Reaction (PCR) and Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) have been
 developed, it still required transporting the samples from water resources to the laboratory,
 high-cost, complicated equipment usage, complex procedures, as well as the requirement of
 skilled specialist to cope with the complexity which limit their wide spread practice in water
 quality detection. Recently, development of biosensor device that is easy to perform, portable,
 highly sensitive and selective becomes indispensable in detecting extremely lower
 consolidation of pathogenic E. coli bacteria in water samples.
 1. Introduction
 Some of the major health risks are caused by microorganisms such as bacteria or pathogen because it’s
 may survive, reproduce and disperse in water systems [1]. Approximately, 1.7 billion children in
 developing countries under age five died due to diarrhea, mainly by drinking contaminated water that
 has been reported by World Health Organization (WHO). Besides, 525,000 children deaths a year in
 world-wide because of the poor water quality, sanitation and hygiene mainly through infectious
 diarrhea [2, 3]. Human and animal waste in water resources can cause water to contaminate [4]. There
 is no method has been reported used to numerate or isolate all of the particular noteworthy pathotypes
 because there have so much element in water other than dangerous bacteria and directly testing a large
 variety of pathogens will be difficult, pricey, and time consuming [3]. Therefore, several approached
 are developed to pointedly numerate or isolate convinced pathotypes. E. coli as shown in Figure 1 is
 the best-known coliform to indicate the fecal contamination because it can be found almost
 exclusively in human and animal feces [2, 5].
 Therefore, measuring E. coli bacteria in water resources become a critical issue to indicate fecal
 contaminant from human and animal. The monitoring device to detect the amount of E. coli bacteria is
 crucial to maintain the quality of water and protect public health. It remains a significant risk to people
 ContentfromthisworkmaybeusedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution
 of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI.
 Published under licence by IOP Publishing Ltd

 for minimizing the spreading of infectious disease from E. coli because it can lead to some diseases
 such as bloody diarrhea, kidney failure and can cause death if not treated immediately. E. coli is in a
 group of Enterobacteriaceae which is in Gram-negative bacteria family and known as most infecting
 organisms in that group. This bacteria are non-spore forming and rod shaped with approximately 0.5
 µmin diameter and between 1.0 to 3.0 µm in length [7].
 Envelope Nucleoid
 Figure 1. Image of an E. coli cell [6].
 2. Conventional Method
 There are conventional microbiological tests that have ability to numerate the bacteria levels in water
 or other substances such as Multiple Tube Fermentation (MTF) [8], Plate Count Enumeration Method
 and Membrane Filter (MF) technique [9]. These methods are labelled as conventional microbiological
 method introduced in 19 centuries that's already been approved by U.S. Environmental Protection
 Agency (EPA) because of high accuracy [10]. Nowadays, although the methods are still being used for
 routine detection of E. coli in drinking water, it became not practical since the result can only be
 confirmed in several days and required expert in the biological area to perform the cultivation step.
 Multiple-tube fermentation Technique (MTF) is based on the principle of dilution by using
 Most Probable Number (MPN) to enumerate total bacteria form [11]. The MTF technique is made of a
 series of dilutions generally one millilitre are shifted into several fermentation tubes [12]. The total
 specific bacteria accommodate with liquid medium are very suitable for growing in the fermentation
 tube as shown in Figure 2. The inverted gas collected in the fermentation tube shown positive result.
 Furthermore, this method became particularly useful for Plate Count Enumeration Methods in Figure 3
 that is more often and convenient to use especially for an approximation of the E. coli bacteria count
 since too much tube needed in MTF method. MF is another traditional technique that can be used for
 E. coli detection by delivering water sample over small pore grid paper filter to trap the bacteria and
 selected agar are added into plate for growing the E. coli [13]. After incubation process, the dot that
 represent colonies are counted by using Plate Count Enumeration Method [9].
 (a)
 (b)
2

Figure 2. Interpretation methods to determine the concentration of viable E. coli. (a) MTF
method; (b) Plate Count Enumeration Method [14].
 3. Emerging Methods
 Although standard methods can provide reliable results in the presence or absence along with the
 concentration of the E. coli bacteria, they take at least two days for the tests, which limits their use in
 the prevention of waterborne disease. Therefore, several methods have emerged to realize the rapid
 detection and enumeration of E. coli bacteria in drinking water such as Immunological [15-18] and
 Polymerase Chain Reaction [19-21].
 Immunological methods perform more rapid method compare to conventional MTF, Plate
 Count Enumeration Method and MF. The test measured amount of E. coli bacteria within a 24-hour
 period so it performs better than traditional methods that required at least two days to get the result. In
 immunological, the antigen-antibody reaction are performed and can be anticipated by several
 approaches, such as Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA). ELISA took about 24 hours
 because a pre-enrichment culture was still needed, make it not applicable for on-field applications [22].
 Nucleic acid-based techniques by using Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) became promising
 due to high sensitivity and rapidity. The conventional PCR seems to have several limitations because it
 detects both viable and dead cells. Besides, it is very complicated method where there need many tube
 variable to perform the process and still timely [23]. An advanced method has been developed to
 overcome the problem, namely Reverse Transcriptase (RT-PCR) [24]. The technology already solved
 the problem and became more distinct to differentiate between viable and dead cells besides
 performing rapidly process. The research on PCR are performed to produce less complicated and
 simple made by Soto-Munoz L. et al. called Real-Time PCR [25]. However, it contains an extremely
 toxic compound (e.g. Propidium monoxide) make it become not appropriate to use [26].
 Although many advanced methods are used to detect E. coli bacteria in water, only PCR and
 ELISA approaches are declared as established methods [27]. Both methods are the most common tools
 used studied by Lusaka et al. [28]. A researcher found that both methods can be merged together to
 produce more robust results [23]. PCR is an excellent method of E. coli detection compared to the
 standard culture and ELISA method since it is very sensitive, accurate and a promise to real-time
 quantitative. Despite its highly sensitive, PCR is difficult to operate because the complex standardized
 protocols were needed during testing process [29]. Therefore, a skilled worker is required while
 running the machine to cope with its complexity.
 4. Biosensors
 Biosensors are small devices that employ biological/biochemical reactions for detecting target analytes.
 Basically, the device consists of a biocatalyst and a transducer. Biocatalyst may be a cell, tissue,
 enzyme or even an oligonucleotide [30]. There are many transducers which can be used to detect a
 range of chemical, optical, and biological signals generated by the targeted pathogen. Most detection
 technologies are revolving around the measurement of optical, electrochemical and piezoelectric [31].
 Application and technologies in biosensors for E. coli detection water environmental analysis had
 reviewed in many articles [30-35]. The sensitivity of most biosensor seems has significantly increased
 in recent years, but it still has some shortcoming and needs more improvement to increase the
 sensitivity. In E. coli bacteria detection, selectivity also the main parameter to take account. To make
 the sensor became high selectivity, the molecular and bio-molecular recognition is employed on the
 receptive layer such as antigen-antibody binding (i.e. any chemicals, bacteria, viruses, or pollen
 binding to a specific protein) [32].
3

4.1. Optical biosensor

 Optical detection method is the most widely operated in pathogen monitoring system due to highly
 sensitive. Such diverse methods include detection based on absorption, fluorescence, refraction,
 reflection and chemiluminescence. Among of all diversity, fluorescence and absorption techniques are
 the simplest technique to use for monitoring and enumerate E. coli. B. Heery et al. had produced an
 immunoassay fluorescence device using specific enzyme assays of E. coli that was capable to deliver
 results on-site as low as 250 CFU/100 mL within 75 min [36]. Although labelling fluorescence
 detection method has high selectivity for detecting E. coli, majority of these techniques involve sample
 filtration, lysing, incubation, and detection steps which is critical when substrate quantity is limited.
 Furthermore, the process of labelling of fluorescence signal suffer from a relatively bulky external
 equipment and longer time of analysis. Efforts to miniaturize this platform are currently underway. A
 simple method using absorption techniques is analysed by N. M. Salih et al. that detect E. coli bacteria
 suspension in Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) Glass [37]. The microfluidic based that are represented
 by the system are noble for miniaturizing the analytical instrumentation. However, the method suffers
 from lack of selectivity since it has possibility to detect other materials.
 The demand for high throughput label-free multiplexed biosensors for biological sensing has
 increased in the last decades. Therefore, the circumstances have led to the development of fiber optics
 [38-41], planar waveguides [42-44] and surface plasmon resonance [45-50] in the area of optical
 biosensor. These techniques are modified by the interaction of bio-recognition element, such as
 enzymes, antibodies, antigens, or receptors of E. coli used on it to make it highly selective. The
 concept of fiber optics is that the transmission of light energy is passing through transparent fiber as
 shown in Figure 3. Fiber optic known as an advanced technology and perform good performance, high
 bandwidth, low loss and relatively cheap that make it suitable mechanism for biosensor. One of the
 limitation of employing optical fiber for bacteria identification is the change of temperature that can
 vary the material optical properties. Therefore, if the sample gets much colder or hotter it gives
 inaccurate readings so it only design for specific temperature [46]. In planar optical waveguides, thin
 optically transparent film with that has high refractive more than superstrate mediums and adjacent
 substrate is usually being used. Under this condition, light is combined into the thin waveguide film
 are constrained to the layer and generate to meaningful distances as shown in Figure 4 [47]. SPR is
 known as label-free biosensor that produce real-time result based on changes the refractive index on
 the surface of sensor part which is proportional to the biomolecule concentration. The operating
 regulation of a typical SPR instrument is presented in Figure 5 [48].
 Figure 3. Schematic illustration using fiber optics in E. coli detection [35].
 4


 Figure
 4.
 Planar
 waveguides
 illustration using laser beam [51].
4.2 Electrochemical biosensors
 Figure 5. CMOS Camera-Based SPR
 in E. coli detection [50].
 The electrochemical based approach is another possible technique for identification and
 quantification of E. coli. The basic of electrochemical dealt with interconversion between chemical
 and electrical energy. This detection method was based on amperometric, impedimetric,
 potentiometric and conductometric with its parameters such as current, impedance, potential, and
 conductance respectively [52]. Amperometric is known as the most typical electrochemical detection
 method used for pathogen detection and it has superior sensitivity compare to other electrochemical
 method. Rochelet et al. measure β-D glucuronidase (GLUase) activity with disposable carbon sensors
 [53]. J-j. Gau et al. has evolved a system of amperometric identification and enumeration of E. coli
 uses the consolidation of Self-Assembled Monolayers (SAM), microelectromechanical systems
 (MEMS), enzyme amplification and DNA hybridization. By employing ssDNA-rRNA hybridization
 and amplification of enzymatic, high specificity for E. coli was achieved [54]. In potentiometric
 detection-based, the conversion occurs from the bio-recognition into a potential signal. Generally, to
 measure the electrical potential difference or electromotive force between two electrodes at near zero
 current a high impedance voltmeter is used. The feasibility of detecting E. coli in water with simple
 flow injection are analyse using Chronopotentiometric Aptasensing by J. H. Lei et al. Aptamer is used
 as a bioreceptor and the polyion-sensitive membrane electrode as a signal transducer [55]. Recently,
 Shaibani et al. developed a rapid, simple and low cost E. coli detection with the pH sensitive hydrogel
 nanofiber-light addressable potentiometric sensor (NF-LAPS) as shown in Figure 6 [56]. The system
 of NF-LAPS provides a theoretical limit of detection (LOD) of 20 CFU/ml show it very high
 sensitivity.
 Then, the assimilation of impedance approach to recognition biological technology has driven
 by the impedance biosensors development that are boundless in the recent years. Colquhoun et al. has
 utilized a medium of trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) and glucuronic acid that are very specific for E.
 coli in imperometric based sensor to detect E. coli in water samples [47]. Promising result had shown
 in the research which indicates the change of impedance during the growing of E. coli bacteria.
 Compact E. coli biosensor Electrochemical Impedance Immunosensor Based on SAM been reported
 by Z. Li et al. with a detection limit of 102 CFU/mL as shown in Figure 7 [57]. The miniature of
 electrode to micro size in this report represent the usage of electrode nowadays that minimizing the
 volume of testing sample. The smaller size can make the sensor prototype become compact.
 Conductometric detection method is based on the connection between conductance parameter and bio
 recognition applying method. Z. Muhammad-Tahir and E. C. Alocilja had evolved a conductometric
 biosensor that successfully detecting bacteria such as E. coli and Salmonella [58]. Research work
 shows a specific, high limit of detection, low sample volume used and near real time assay mechanism.
 5
Figure 6. Nanofiber-light
addressable potentiometric sensor
(NF-LAPS) mechanism [56].
4.3 Piezoelectric biosensors
Figure 7. Microelectrode using Impedance- Based
 immunosensor [57].
 Piezoelectric based detection methods using quartz crystal are mostly utilized that can
 oscillates at a defined frequency when apply an oscillating voltage. The rapid resulting assay
 performed in ten minutes are developed by Pohanka et al. [59]. The piezoelectric crystal surface are
 linked with a polyclonal antibody using glutaraldehyde to detect E. coli that had a limit of detection of
 1 × 106 CFU/mL. In the research by X. L. Su et al., piezoelectric methods have been applied to
 enumerate E. coli immobilized on a SAM [60]. This finding showed potential to be combined 16
 mercaptopropanoic acid (MHDA) with SAM for better sensitivity compare by using protein A in the
 Piezoelectric Immuno-sensor with limit of detection of 103 CFU/ml within 30 to 50 min. Based on the
 finding, V.K.T Ngo et al. has developed Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM) biosensor by combined
 16-mercaptopropanoic acid (MHDA) with SAM [61]. The result shown better sensitivity with limid of
 detection of 102 CFU/ml E. coli O157:H7 within 50 min. Recently, F. Tong et al. developed the
 piezoelectric biosensor with an annular microelectrode as shown in Figure 8. By using micro-scale
 structure of microelectrode, the optimization in term of current density, rapid response time and mass
 transfer between the electrodes [62]. The benefit of using piezoresistivity method is that the detection
 mechanism can be integrated easily into lab-on-a-chip type devices. Moreover, it is more cooperative
 with small amount of sample.
 6
 ISMAP 2017 
 IOP Conf. Series: Journal of Physics: Conf. Series 995 (2018) 012065 
 1234567890 ‘’“”
 IOP Publishing
 doi :10.1088/1742-6596/995/1/012065
 Figure 8. Schematic diagram of the piezoelectric biosensor connected serially with microelectrode.
 I: (a) culture-detection well; (b) a detection plate containing 8 detection wells; II: frequency meter
 and data processing system; III: PC interface; PQC: 9 MHz AT-cut piezoelectric quartz crystal [62].
 5. Conclusion
 One of the major problems in developing a rapid test for E. coli is the bulky and complicated
 machine used, including lengthy enrichment procedures. Therefore, biosensors became an attractive
 proposition for diagnostic and bacteria detection in the research area. It continuously interesting
 because of newly recognized, newly appreciated, and evolving agents. Developing a method to detect
 E. coli is not only benefits the consumer by ensuring the safety of the water supply, but also benefits
 the industry by preventing costly recalls. The requirement to increase the sensitivity is needed to
 identify and consider microbial pathogens for possible regulation in water supply since E. coli present
 at very low magnification in water resources. The research area by using the interaction of bio
 recognition element in label-free biosensor became a trend nowadays. The main advantages offered by
 biosensors are the possibility of portability, of miniaturization and working on-site, and the ability to
 measure pollutants in complex matrices with minimal sample preparation. Although many of the
 systems developed cannot compete with conventional analytical methods in terms of accuracy they
 can be used by regulatory authorities and by industry to provide enough information for routine testing
 and screening of samples.
 Acknowledgments
 This paper was partly sponsored by the Centre for Graduate Studies UTHM.