What Is Klebsiella pneumoniae?
Klebsiella pneumoniae is a type of bacteria that’s usually found in poop (stool) and your respiratory tract. It can also live in dirt and water in the environment.

Klebsiella can cause:

Abdominal infections, like liver abscesses or peritonitis
Bloodstream infections (bacteremia)
Meningitis
Pneumonia
Skin infections, like cellulitis
Urinary tract infections
Wound or surgical infections
Klebsiella can be dangerous because some strains are resistant to antibiotics. This means standard antibiotics don’t work to get rid of the infection, and it can be hard to treat.

Types
There are different types of Klebsiella pneumoniae:

Classic: These strains can live in your body and usually don’t harm you. But they can spread in hospitals and long-term care facilities. They usually infect people with medical devices or those who have other health conditions.
Hypervirulent: These are more likely to cause severe illness and spread outside of healthcare facilities (community-acquired).
Symptoms and Causes
Klebsiella symptoms include fever, headache, belly pain, eye pain, red and swollen skin, cough, difficulty peeing and more
Symptoms of Klebsiella infections depends on where in your body you’re infected. You won’t have all these symptoms.
What are the symptoms of a Klebsiella pneumoniae infection?
Klebsiella symptoms depend on where you get infected. Some symptoms could include:

Belly pain
Cough, shortness of breath
Difficulty peeing or painful urination
Eye pain
Fever, chills
Headache
Redness, swelling or itching at a surgical or injury site
How do you get Klebsiella pneumoniae?
You can get a Klebsiella infection from:

Contaminated medical equipment (like a urinary catheter or ventilator)
Contaminated soil or water
Respiratory droplets (from coughing or sneezing)
Cuts, burns or other wounds that break your skin
Skin-to-skin contact with other people
Surgical procedures
Risk factors
You might be at a higher risk for a Klebsiella infection if you’re hospitalized or live in a long-term care facility. You’re also at higher risk if you have:

A blood cancer
Diabetes
A weakened immune system
A urinary catheter, breathing tube, feeding tube or other device that goes into your body
A recent history of abdominal surgery
Complications
Klebsiella pneumoniae infections can be severe. They can damage tissue and spread to other parts of your body. This can cause lifelong health issues or even death. These include:

Blindness
Necrotizing fasciitis, a bacterial infection that destroys tissue quickly
Sepsis, a severe reaction to infection that can damage your organs
Diagnosis and Tests
How is Klebsiella pneumoniae diagnosed?
A provider diagnoses Klebsiella infections by testing a sample of your blood, pee or tissue. Tell your provider about any implanted medical devices you have or recent surgeries. Depending on your symptoms, you might also need imaging, like a CT scan.

Management and Treatment
How is Klebsiella pneumoniae treated?
Healthcare providers treat Klebsiella infections with antibiotics. Often, certain antibiotics don’t work on Klebsiella bacteria. So, your provider may need to try different antibiotics or a combination of antibiotics to get rid of the infection.

When should I see my healthcare provider?
If you have risk factors for a Klebsiella infection, ask your healthcare provider about the signs you should look out for. Follow up with your provider if you have any concerning symptoms.

When should I go to the ER?
Go to the emergency room if you have any signs of severe illness, including:

Fever over 103 degrees Fahrenheit or 40 degrees Celsius
Severe pain
Seizures
Confusion or disorientation
Signs of an infected wound, like swelling, redness, discoloration or oozing pus or fluid
Outlook / Prognosis
How harmful is Klebsiella pneumoniae?
Klebsiella infections can be serious. Providers will monitor you closely during treatment. The outcome depends on:

Where the infection is in your body, and whether it spreads to other body parts
Whether the strain is resistant to antibiotics or if it’s a hypervirulent strain
Whether you have other health conditions
Prevention
Can Klebsiella pneumoniae infections be prevented?
Healthcare providers follow safety and sterilization rules to prevent healthcare-acquired infections like Klebsiella. These include:

Washing their hands
Disinfecting surfaces
Ensuring that people only take antibiotics when they have bacterial infections
Sterilizing medical devices
You can help prevent Klebsiella infections by:

Washing your hands frequently, especially if you’re caring for someone with a weakened immune system or another health condition
Asking your provider how long you need to use invasive medical devices like catheters, and how to prevent infection while you need the device
Avoiding other people if you’re sick
Covering your mouth and nose when you cough or sneeze
A note from Cleveland Clinic
Harmless bacteria live on and inside your body. But sometimes, they can get into parts of your body where they’re not supposed to be and make you sick. Even if you’re in the hospital, make sure you let your care team know if you have any new or concerning symptoms. This can help any infections get treatment as soon as possible.