What Is Pseudomonas Aeruginosa?
Pseudomonasis a type of bacteria that's commonly found outdoors, such as in soil and water. It can also thrive in moist places indoors. Some types of this germ, especially Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa), can infect you and make you really sick.

If you're in good health, you probably don't have to worry about getting severely ill from a pseudomonas infection. You may only get a mild skin rash or an ear or eye infection. Or you may have already had a pseudomonas infection and didn't realize it. For instance, Pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause swimmer's ear and skin rashes from hot tubs. 

But if you're sick or your immune system is weakened, pseudomonas can cause a severe infection that doesn't always respond well to antibiotic treatment. In some people, it can be life-threatening. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is one of the most common and serious infections people get from being in the hospital.

Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Causes
You can get a pseudomonas infection in several different ways. It can grow on fruits and vegetables, so you could get sick from eating contaminated food. It also thrives in wet areas such as lakes, pools, hot tubs, bathrooms, kitchens, and sinks.

The most severe infections occur in health care settings, such as hospitals. Pseudomonas aeruginosa can easily grow in humidifiers and types of medical equipment (catheters, for instance) if they aren’t properly cleaned. If health care workers don’t wash their hands well, they can also transfer the bacteria from an infected patient to you.

Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Risk Factors
Your risk of apseudomonas infection is higher if you:

Have an open wound from surgery
Are being treated for burns
Use a breathing machine, catheter, or any other medical device
Have diabetes 
Have cystic fibrosis or another chronic lung issue
Have a health condition that weakens your immune system, such as HIV
Take medications that suppress your immune system, such as those for cancer
Where Can You Find Pseudomonas Aeruginosa?
Other surprising places pseudomonasbacteria can be found include:

Drains and plumbing parts
Cleaning supplies, such as mops
Swimming pools and hot tubs
Contact lenses or contaminated lens solution
Body piercings or body piercing equipment
Nail salon equipment
In hospitals, Pseudomonas aeruginosa can turn up in areas such as:

Cooked food
Soap bars
Toothbrushes
Ice machines
Disinfecting solutions
Sanitizers
Surgical instruments
Related:
How to Keep Your Kidneys Healthy
Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Symptoms
The signs of infection depend on where the Pseudomonas aeruginosa is in your body. It can infect any part, from your fingernails to your blood, lungs, stomach, urinary tract, or tendons. Pressure sores, wounds, and burns can also become infected.

Places where infection occurs and their signs include:

Ears: Pain and discharge
Skin: Rash, including pimples filled with pus
Eyes: Pain, redness, swelling
Bones or joints: Joint pain and swelling; neck or back pain that lasts weeks
Wounds: Green pus or discharge that may have a fruity smell
Digestive tract: Headache, diarrhea
Lungs: Pneumonia; severe coughing and congestion
Urinary tract: Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Fever is also often a sign of a severe pseudomonas infection.

How Do I Know if I Have a Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Infection?
In some cases, your doctor may suspect a pseudomonas infection by hearing about your symptoms and doing a physical exam — for instance, looking at your skin or eyes. They can take a sample of your blood or another body fluid and send it to a lab to confirm their hunch. They could also order an imaging test, such as an X-ray, MRI, or ultrasound, to look for signs of infection deep inside your body.

Test results can help them decide which types of antibiotics will work best to cure your infection.

Pseudomonas Infection Treatment
If you have a mild infection, your doctor can prescribe a course of antibiotics. Depending on where your infection is in your body, this medicine could be in the form of a cream, eye drops, ear drops, or pills you take by mouth.

A severe infection may require weeks of antibiotics that could be given through an IV. Every pseudomonas bacteria is slightly different, and strains are constantly changing, so these types of infections can be hard to treat. Many times, you may need to take more than one kind of antibiotic to get rid of Pseudomonas aeruginosa for good.

More recently, scientists have found that bacteriophages, viruses that infect bacteria, may be useful for Pseudomonas aeruginosa treatment. Early research in labs (but not yet in humans) shows that these bacteriophages could offer a few possible solutions:

Cefepime-beta-lactams inhibitor (BLI) combinations, such as cefepime-taniborbactam and cefepime-zidebactam
Cefepime-taniborbactam
Cefepime-zidebactam
Cefiderocol
Ceftazidime-avibactam
Ceftolozane-tazobactam
Imipenem-relebactam
Meropenem-nacubactam
There's also some research on plant-derived compounds to treat these types of infection. It suggests that some compounds could disrupt biofilms, which protect the bacteria and lead to resistance. Medical grade Manuka honey has shown some promise to disrupt biofilms in wounds. But more research is needed, and efforts to combat Pseudomonas aeruginosa are mostly focused on other possible solutions.

Related:
How to Prevent Damaging Your Kidneys
Is Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Resistant to Antibiotics?
It can be. One type of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, called carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (CP-CRPA), makes special proteins that prevent most available antibiotics from working. That includes carbapenems, powerful antibiotics which are prescribed when no other treatment has worked.

CP-CRPA is also able to share its genetic code with other bacteria, kind of like sharing answers to a test with other classmates so they can cheat, too. That can spread antibiotic resistance.

The WHO has identified CP-CRPA as a high priority to address, and the CDC lists it as a serious public health threat.

For now, CP-CRPA is not common in the U.S. But your risk for it is higher if you:

Are in the hospital, especially in the ICU
Live in a long-term health care facility
Were recently in the hospital or had a medical procedure outside the U.S. 
Use medical devices or have an implant
Have severe wounds 
Recently took antibiotics
Shared a hospital room with a person with CP-CRPA
Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Complications
Issues that can arise from this type of infection include:

A secondary infection. Taking antibiotics raises your risk of a Clostridioides difficile (C. diff) infection.Common symptoms include diarrhea and mild stomach pain.
Antibiotic resistance. If your infection doesn't respond to antibiotics, that can lead to more doctor visits, hospital stays, higher medical costs, and side effects from the treatments. Your symptoms from the initial infection will also continue and could worsen.
Sepsis. In this, your immune system begins attacking your organs.
Organ failure. An untreated or severe infection can damage vital organs.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and cystic fibrosis (CF)

If you have CF, you may be prone to recurring lung infections with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Once you get infected, it can be hard to get rid of this bacteria completely. P. aeruginosa is also linked to a decline in lung function in people with CF. Getting diagnosed and starting treatment right away will be key.

Studies show that one way you can get sick is by coming into close contact with someone who's infected, although neither of you may know.

Related:
Ways to Keep Your Kidneys Healthy
How Can I Prevent a Pseudomonas Infection?
You can lower your risk of getting sick by trying not to come into contact with this type of bacteria. The good news is that it's simpler than you might think. For instance, you can:

Wash your hands often. This is the best way to avoid getting pseudomonas. If you’re in the hospital, make sure that doctors and nurses always clean their hands with soap and water or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer before touching you.

Rinse fruits and vegetables before eating. Even salad greens should be given a good wash. You can also use a fruit/vegetable wash.

Clean your water bottles. Sterilize with boiling water between each use.

Regularly wash your sheets and towels. Use hot water to kill most of the germs.

Try to cut back on tobacco. Smoking makes it harder for your lungs to ward off germs. If you need help quitting, ask your doctor for advice.

Regularly clean high-touch surfaces in your home. That includes anything that multiple people often touch, including sink faucets, toilet handles, and light switches. Don't forget to also clean your phone and laptop and other screens with an alcohol-based wipe that's safe for electronics.

Avoid unclean pools and hot tubs. Pseudomonas will thrive in them unless they’re cleaned often, and the chlorine and pH are well-controlled.

Ask questions about your medical care. Talk to your doctor if you have worries about getting infected. Ask about the medical equipment you’re using — for instance, how often it’s cleaned or how you need to care for it at home.

Take care of your health. If your doctor has prescribed medicine to manage a health condition, take it exactly as prescribed. Don’t skip a dose. After surgery, be on the lookout for signs of infection. If you run a fever, have pain, or see redness or discharge at your surgery site, call your doctor right away.

What Is the Outlook for Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Infections?
If your infection is mild, you may not even know you've come into contact with P. aeruginosa. You may not show any symptoms or need treatment. Your immune system could manage to get rid of the bacteria without any extra help.

Related:
How to Prevent Damaging Your Kidneys
If you do have symptoms but are otherwise healthy, antibiotics can often clear a Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. But it will be important to follow your doctor’s instructions exactly. If not, the bacteria could become more resistant and harder to treat.

Simple cases of Pseudomonas aeruginosa can start improving within a few days, while more severe infections may take weeks or months to go away completely.

By some accounts, about 39%-82% of people who have been diagnosed with a Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection will recover.

It's extremely hard for people with cystic fibrosis to beat the infection, and it is the leading cause of death for people with the disease.

Takeaways
P. aeruginosa is a common strain of bacteria that's found outdoors but can sometimes get inside your body and cause an infection. The symptoms it causes will depend on where in your body it is. If you're in good health and your infection is simple, antibiotics can usually clear up Pseudomonas aeruginosa. But severe cases can be resistant to treatment and lead to serious, and sometimes life-threatening, complications.

Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Infection FAQs
Can Pseudomonas aeruginosa be sexually transmitted?

It's not a sexually transmitted infection (STI). But if you have sex in a hot tub or pool that's contaminated with P. aeruginosa, it's possible that your reproductive system or urinary tract could get infected.

Is a pseudomonas infection contagious?

Yes. It can be spread through direct contact. Some people even have P. aeruginosa living naturally on their skin, although it may not cause any symptoms. But if you're in good health, coming into contact with it this way is unlikely to cause an infection.